NAF000334
This Is a story about Heishe, also called ǀʹuma ǀʹumane. At that time when Heishe was on the earth, the ostrich was a person. Now the ostrich had quite a number of children. One day he gathered them all together and went to ǀʹuma ǀʹumane's camp, ǀʹuma ǀʹumane said "Koo, you sure do have a lot of children: And here I am without a single child. I have eaten them all up." (Heishe, of course, was fooling the ostrich.) "I've eaten all my children. Why don't we eat yours, too?"
At this time ostrich said "Really?" and began to think about eating his own children. Meanwhile, Heishe's children were just off playing someplace. Heishe had sent them out to play in the bush so that the ostrich would come with his children and be fooled into killing them.
"Yo!" said Heishe to the ostrich. "You sure have a lot of children. Are you just going to pass me by, when last night I ate up all my own children?" And the ostrich said "Really? Shall I kill one of mine?" "Yes," said Heishe. So they took one and killed it. Then they cooked it. It sat in the fire and cooked until it was done. Then they ate it up. When it was gone, they took another and killed it. It cooked until it was done. Then they killed another, until every one of them was gone. They ate them all up. They ate and ate until they were all gone.
Then Heishe said "Hey! I was testing you out! I fooled you! Just look at all my children come running now. And all of yours are dead. I fooled you and ate up all your children!"
The ostrich said "Oh! What has this man done to me? I came to his camp and he has ruined my children and eaten them all up!" Then Heishe stood up and took his water pots and hung them across his shoulders. He went off to fetch water. The ostrich was left all alone.
When Heishe was returning with the water, the ostrich sat down squarely in the middle of his path. He sat down with his legs stretched out across the road. Heishe came up to him. "Move your legs so I can pass!" he said. But the ostrich said, "No, I'm tired. I'm sitting in the road and resting."
Heishe said "Do you want me to go around you?" And the ostrich said, "Yes, just pass by." So Heishe started to go around him. But the ostrich grabbed his foot and lifted it suddenly so that he fell down. His water pots broke and all the water ran out. Heishe jumped to his feet and went home to fetch new pots. But the ostrich still sat there, because his heart was heavy for his children. Again Heishe filled his water pots, and again he came to where the ostrich was sitting in the road. "Move aside and let me pass!" he said. "No, just go around me," said the ostrich. When Heishe tried to pass, the ostrich grabbed his leg and yanked him off balance. Again his water pots broke. Furious, Heishe grabbed a stick and beat the ostrich's legs. He beat them until they broke. Then he left and went off.
The ostrich just lay there and cried. Heishe went off and turned into a little bird. He turned into that little bird with red eyes, the one people call ǂtoma kadi kadi [the red-eyed bulbul]. And the ostrich became another bird. The two of them were separate from that day. And that's the end of the story.
