NAF000339
The great lion who commands things once took some young lion men with him when he went hunting. They dried some meat at a certain camp, and then they moved on to a different place. They followed tracks from the new camp, and finally killed an eland far from the new camp. But they had chased it so far that they didn't know the waterholes. They had killed the eland and it was fat, but they didn't know where to find water.
The lion said, "Oh! We've killed this animal so far away that I don't recognize the place. Where will we find water to drink since we don't know the waterholes?" Then he asked himself, "What can I do? What trick can I do so that we will find water to drink?"
While the lion was wondering about the water, he and the young men lions were eating the meat of the eland. They ate and ate until thirst was killing them. Then the lion said to himself, "Oh! I'll do a trick with one of these young lions." Then he said to the young man, "Friend, I'm going to make a carrying net to put you in. Then I'll lay you where the old brown hyena will find you. He's bound to pick you up and carry you to a place where there is water."
So he did that. The lions put one of their brothers into a gemsbok carrying net and lay him upon the path. But when the brown hyenas came, he was afraid and called out "Who's that?" so that they dropped him and ran away. "Oh! What kind of help are you?" asked the great lion. "Who can I use instead? Who will listen to my instructions carefully?" So he chose another young lion. "Now, are you going to act like my other son when the brown hyenas come? Remember that we have this thirst that we have not yet drunk away. If I use you for this trick, will you be afraid and cry out?" The young lion said, "I'm dying of thirst. I won't be afraid. Either the brown hyena will kill me or I will escape untouched. Go on—you can rely on me." So the old lion took a carrying net and lay it out on the ground. He put in water carriers and a skin water bag. He packed these in, and then he put in some eland meat. Then he took the young lion and put him on top of all these things. He sewed up the mouth of the bag. He gave the young lion a knife and cut him a hole in the side of the carrying net so he could see what was going on and still remain hidden. He fixed up all these things for the young lion. Then he laid the bundle out in the bush.
Now the brown hyenas were off drinking at their waterhole. When they had finished drinking, they sat and talked. The old brown hyena said, "Do I smell meat?" Then they all came to where the carrying net lay in the bush. But instead of eating its contents, they picked it up and slung it on their backs. They began to carry it back to the waterhole. The young lion didn't sit up in fear; he just lay in the net and allowed himself to be carried. The brown hyenas walked with him until they came down to the waterhole. They went down to the waterhole and laid him down right next to the water. Then they went to drink their fill before they ate the meat.
The young lion lay in the net. He could hear the brown hyenas drinking. So he loosened the carrying net and freed himself from it. Then he hid himself nearby. He just lay down so that he was invisible to the brown hyenas.
When the old brown hyena had finished drinking, he and the other hyenas came back to the carrying net to eat the eland meat. They ate some of it and then they went off hunting.
When they had gone, the young lion came out from his hiding place and drank his fill at the waterhole. He drank and drank and drank. He drank until he felt fine again. Then he ate some meat and went to sleep. When he woke up, he ate some more and drank some more. Then he slept again.
In the morning, he filled all the water containers and put them back into the carrying net. Then he slung the net over his shoulders and carried it back to the other lions. When he got there it was nearly sunset. He gave water to them all, but to his fearful brother he said, "You're not going to get any of this to drink. You'll have to wait until you get to the waterhole. You won't get any of this water."
So the other lions drank the water. The brave young lion pointed out the path to the water for the fearful one. "Just follow this path and you'll get to the water. You go drink your fill there, and the rest of us will stay here and eat meat." So the fearful lion got up and went off toward the waterhole. While he was gone, the others packed up and went home. Thirst probably killed the young lion along his way as he tried to follow them, but they would have nothing further to do with him, and so they left him. These things really happened.
