NAF000338
Kanǁa and ǃXoma, two brothers, were the sone of Kauha. One day the two of them went out hunting. They walked and walked and spent the night where they were at nightfall. In the morning they moved on and traveled further, and camped somewhere else. They slept there. And in the morning they got up and hoisted their hunting gear on their shoulders and walked until they found another place to camp.
Now these two long ago slept two nights. On the third day they flushed an eland. They hunted it down and killed it and stayed there skinning it and butchering it. They cut all the meat into thin strips, took it and hung it up to dry. Now the lions—at this time some of the people had already been turned into animals—the lions came. They came to where the boys were and saw them. Then the lions killed them. And buried them in the stomach contents of the dead eland. In the eland's chyme they buried them. The lions buried them there, the boys who had killed the eland. And when they were finished, they left. Just like people.
Then their father came, and was searching and searching for his sons. He searched and searched but couldn't find them. For the lions had killed them. So he resolved to kill his servants, the lions. His children died so he decided to kill his servants.
So he tracked them. He went tracking after them and took the tortoise [zəm] along with him. He also took the turtle [ǁgwa] along with him. (The tortoise and the turtle at that time were people.) And they tracked them and tracked them and followed their spoor. After awhile they came and saw where the boys had slept. And the tortoise put his head into the ashes of their fire. He said "This fire is cold at the center." That's what he said.
So they left that fire and again followed their tracks. They tracked them until they arrived at the place the boys had slept on the second day. Kauha told the tortoise "Put your head in the fire." And the tortoise stuck in his head and this time it burned. So he cried and cried and ran about rubbing his head in the sand. And Kauha said "ǀhn ǀhn! Shut your foul mouth!" because the tortoise was going about crying and rubbing his head on the ground. "ǀhn ǀhn! Shut your rotten mouth and be quiet so we can look for these kids, will you?" That's what Kauha said.
So the tortoise kept quiet. And they tracked them and tracked them and finally they came to where the eland had died. When they looked the place over, they discovered that the lions had killed the boys. "Is this how my children have died?" When he had said that, he prepared to camp there. He slept there where they had died.
There he began to gather and gather and gather the birds, and he brought there those birds called kx'aushehms that cry "chauko, chauko, chauko, chauko." And they all cried out. Kauha said "ǀhn! What a racket! How can I learn anything from these birds? My children—where will I find my sons? My children have long since died. Why can't I see my children?" Next he took the chu, But the chu chattered just as badly. So Kauha drove it away. Then he brought the ǂdwore. The ǂdwore was a human being. But it chattered too. So he drove the ǂdwore away. One by one he tried all the birds. But they all talked nonsense and didn't tell him what he wanted to know, so he drove them away. At last he went and got the kx'aushehms, those who perch and cry "chokoko, chokoko, choko." The kx'aushehms all came and perched there, he brought them there and they perched and cried their cry.
Kauha began to dance. They had laid down a dance circle and Kauha began to dance. He danced and danced and the tortoise came into the circle and wobbled from side to side. The turtle danced into the circle and stumped about on his short legs. They all danced and danced and soon the nǀum of the dance began to warm up. So Kauha said "ǀhn ǀhn! Come out!" He was talking to his sons in the pile of chyme. "Hooray for the lightning! Hooray for us!" crowed Kauha. So Kanǁa and ǃXoma crawled out of the pile of chyme. Kauha was very happy, and he took his children and went home.
This is how I have heard the old people tell about the ǁaihas of long ago.
