NAF000466
One day, the people say the lion and jackal went to hunt for elands. They came to a bushy place, so they lay down, a little distance apart, for the elands to pass that way. After a time they came, and as they passed each picked out an animal. The lion shot, but he missed his buck. The jackal next had a shot, and he cried out, "I have got my buck," but the lion was very angry at the jackal, and he said, "I have shot and killed the buck, you only missed." Now the jackal was very much afraid, and he said nothing, but quite agreed with him. They went home together, intending to come later on, so as to carry home the eland, after they had had a short sleep, as the sun was quite hot. But the jackal had made up his mind to deceive the lion, and so to get the buck. So when the lion lay down to sleep, the jackal pretended to sleep also; but he soon rose and ran back to the dead eland. He tore open its belly, and creeping into it, he stole all the fat of the inside. To deceive the lion, he made his nose bleed all the way back, so that the lion might. think the eland had run off, and might follow the spoor and be deceived. He wanted the lion to go wrong. The lion awoke, and began to follow the blood spoor which the jackal had made. It led him along the wrong way; but after a time he found the carcase of the eland. At first he could not see the jackal, but he caught sight of his tail sticking out of the eland's belly. He was very angry, and caught the jackal's tail in his teeth, and he swung the jackal out. "Now," said the lion, "you have deceived me, and I won't give you the best part of the meat." "Oh father," said the jackal, "I was just preparing the fat for your wife." Now the lion did not believe him, so he told him to stand back. He proceeded to tear out the inside of the eland. He gave the jackal the fat of the breast, and said to him," Take this to my wife," and afterwards he said, "'You can have this for yourself," handing him the lungs. Now the jackal was very angry, but he took the meat, and went to the den of the lioness. He found her there, playing with the cubs. He said to her, "This is from my father," and he threw the lungs at the cubs, so that they were much afraid, and ran to their <pb n="82"/>mother for shelter. The lioness was very angry. Then the jackal said," I must go back to my father, as he is waiting for me." But instead of going back, he called his wife and children from the veld. They all ran away a long distance into the veld, and there he gave them the fat of the eland. They were much pleased with the fat of the eland. So you see this is the reason why a lion will never allow a jackal to feed off the same buck as himself. He always keeps him standing at a distance, and then, when the lion is finished, the jackal takes the meat. This is the end of the tale. 
