NAF000340
The kori bustard made a fire. In the fire he laid long irons. He used his big wings to blow the fire until the irons were red-hot. Then he took the irons and branded the horse, and stood him aside: the bush horse, the one with stripes. The kori bustard created him; he made those stripes on his hide with fire. And he was done with him.
He next took the eland and created the eland. And the eland was just dun-colored. He went to the hartebeest and did the same to him. Then he made the ostrich his wings, and the ostrich had wings.
The kori bustard created all the animals in this way. He took the gemsbok, and the gemsbok calves, and made the stripes on their faces. Then he was finished with all of them. Duikers, all the other animals, he created them too. And they were completed.
Then the kori bustard took the jackal and the brown hyena and made them nephew and uncle to one another. And the brown hyena was a lowly creature and the jackal was a lowly creature. Both these carnivores he made inferior beings.
One day the brown hyena said, "I am going to set a snare." And he did set a snare. And when he went back to look at it he had caught a steenbok. "I think I'll take my steenbok and go to the kori bustard. I want him to give me beautiful markings like the other animals, to show that I have killed a buck and am a hunter" said the brown hyena.
The jackal heard this, and said he would precede the brown hyena to the kori bustard's camp. There he found cooking in a pot the excrement of people who had been eating tsĩ, these beans that the jũǀwasi roast until they pop, making a noise like "ǃkhwi!"? Tsĩ beans grow in open places with no trees. Well, the people had been eating tsĩ, and they defecated afterwards and put the stuff into a pot and cooked it.
When the jackal arrived, the people said, "Fhe, the jackal has come." And this is what they did to him. You know the black hairs on the jackal's back? The people spread the hot tsĩ excrement over his back, and then laid him down and spilled the rest of it over him. It was hot as fire, and it burned his back black. It hurt him terribly! And so he howled.
Then the people said to the jackal "Go away!" (Because of course people revile inferior beings.) They refused to brand him nicely and treated him badly instead. So he ran and flung himself down and jumped up again and ran off crying to his uncle the brown hyena's camp.
When he got there, he lay down again. The brown hyena was packing the steenbok, ready to go to the kori bustard's camp. He got up and took the steenbok and slung it over his shoulder. He was starting to leave when the jackal said, "Brown hyena, where are you going? When I went visiting at the kori bustard's camp the people there hurt my back. It's not a good place—don't go there."
But the brown hyena refused to listen, saying, "That won't happen to me just because it happened to you. The people may have burned your back but they won't burn mine as well. I'm going to go there to get beautiful markings."
So he went to the kori bustard's camp. And the children who had been born to the people there shouted, "Father, father, look at the scum which has arrived, this brown hyena who dares to come here!" 
The brown hyena was startled, and stopped in his tracks. But the kori bustard said, "Listen to these crazy youngsters! Of course you shall come to me—let me brand you with beautiful markings." And the kori bustard sat down and fanned the fire with his wings until the irons were hot, those same irons he had used to brand the other animals.
The people said to the brown hyena, "Now lie down." The brown hyena first lay his steenbok down and then he himself stretched out on the ground. And the people worked over his hair and worked over his hair. Then they wounded his leg so that he still walks around with the wound. The kori bustard brought the hot poker and stuck it into the top of the brown hyena's leg. "Mem!" he wailed. The people refused to let him cry out, saying, "This won't do: don't complain; just lie quietly." They certainly did treat him badly! The fired burned and burned the brown hyena. Then the people said, "Let's also stick the poker in his lower eyelid." And they took it and stuck it beneath his eye—screwed it right in. The fire burned him awfully, and he howled. Then he defecated on the people and ran off.
As he ran away the people took the bag of bones and threw it after him. And they said, "Away with you! Go and eat these bones. Henceforth you will go about eating bones."
The brown hyena's heart was heavy. He came and took the bag of bones and slung it over his shoulder and limped away. After that his only food was bones. Thus it is that when people are away he comes to their camps and goes about eating old bones. The story ends here.
