NAF002029
There was once a woman who was pregnant.
At the day she gave birth she birthed one son first. When she was still preparing for the second one, it came out from near her ribs.
And the second one, when he came out, the woman said, "Where can I wipe my hands?"
And the second child said, "You can wipe them on me".
He said: "I'm following my brother; I want to go". He called his older brother, "Pipi pá". His name is Pipi. And then they went to the other camp. And the women at that camp were not there. They were out gathering wild plants.
The elder brother had a wife there, at that camp. And the younger brother asked him at what time the women were coming back. The older brother told him that you will hear her [his wife] talking. He said you can hear her shouting "Hyũũũ" [elephant vocalization].
The woman is an elephant, the one he has married [the younger brother thought]. And he just told his younger brother that this woman is not a playful woman. When the younger brother said [heard?] this he was thinking of eating his brother's son.
Just then a trance dance was about to start and he told his younger brother to go and see the dancers. And the younger brother refused. He said "Give me your children, I want [you] to sleep, I'll just watch them". He was thinking of eating the child. When they were there at the dancer's place he just took the child and he put the foot prints of the children in the sand some distance away (about three metres). And he killed the child and he cooked it. And ate it.
And the women were just thinking about that man and they were worried about him. "We don't trust that man. Let's go and check". And then they came and asked him: "Where is the child?"
<pb n="374"/>And he said: "Where is he!? Here are his footprints. He's gone this side. Let's follow him". And he stuck to his point that the child was going this way. And when they came to ask him he said in an upset manner: "Here are his footprints. Where is he? Maybe I slept and forgot all about him". And he stuck to his point, and he stuck to his point and he stuck to his point.
And the woman was just looking at him. She suspected that he had eaten her son.
And they slept. And then they packed up their things and just moved to the other camp.
And when they were on their way the younger brother was wearing sandals. And he took off his sandals and he just threw them away. And the vultures were following on the sandals. There were many vultures that descended on the sandals. And when the vultures came to the sandals the younger brother said: "Pipi pá! Let's run over there and see what the vultures are doing!"
And on the way the younger brother said: "I'll just sit down here. I have a thorn in my foot. I'll just sit down. You run along!" And he said: "I'll just wait for your wife to come along and I'll ask her for her awl to take out the thorn".
And when the older brother came to the vultures he saw them to be far away and when he got to them again, he again saw them far away, and again he came and again they were far off in the distance.
And the younger brother spoke to his brother's wife and asked her for an awl. And he took it and pretended to take a thorn out of his foot. He looked at his brother's wife and saw an ant crawling on her throat. He said: 'I'll just take that ant off your throat'. 'No', she said, 'you want to kill me!'
He said, "I'll just take it off with this", and he stabbed her. He killed her. And he cut off her breasts and put them in the fire.
And his brother, when he was running along, was thinking about his brother being alone with his wife and he thought that he would go back just to see what was happening. When the elder brother came he just saw his younger brother killing his wife. He was just roasting her breasts and he was starting to eat one of the breasts.
And the elder brother asked him, "What are you doing? What have you done?"
And his younger brother told him: "Come, and take a taste of this. You said you have married a woman, but you have married an animal".
His elder brother asked him: "Are you not afraid of the fighting that will follow from your killing of this woman?"
He said: "Taste! What are you saying? Just eat!"
And the family of the woman were coming with bows and arrows and axes and knives.
And his younger brother said: "Pipi pá! There's the fighting! It's coming". His elder brother asked him: "What about me? I've done nothing! It's you who has killed the woman!"
And his younger brother said: "Wait! We are men; we can defend ourselves". When they [the wife's people] were near he said to a termite hill: "Open! Open and let me get in!" And just his older brother stayed outside.
And his elder brother climbed up the termite hill and stood on top of it. When they started shooting with bow and arrows and throwing knives and axes he just started to sing: "N!duma hia, n!duma hia, ǂeĩ, ǂeĩ, ǂeĩ" [a non-verbal exclamation].
When they were throwing all of their weapons at him they were killing one another instead of the man who was singing. And they went on killing each other and at the end they saw that they were killing each other and not the man. They stopped fighting and went back home.
<epilogue>And this is the end of story. I heard it from the oldest people.</epilogue>