NAF000301
We who were made first, have come to be last. And those who were created last, have come to be first. Even though they arrived later than we did, Europeans and Bantus have come to be ahead of us.
I refuse this thing, that we should have come to be the last of all. I fear this thing. It gives me pain. And I despise that old man of long ago who caused it to happen. I think that if I saw him today I would beat him. But he's dead and there's just nothing that can be done.
That old man who was responsible for all this was named ǀʼtumaǀʼtuma. He was also called Karãǀʼtuma. One day long ago Karãǀ'tuma was out hunting. And in the bush he discovered a cow. When he saw the cow, he said, "Is this a cow? Is this a buffalo?"
And the cow was not afraid of him; it did not run away. It just stood there. But Karãǀʼtuma did not take it home with him to the village. Instead, he shot it. It just stood there, and he shot it. He never asked himself what is this creature that doesn't fear me, but merely shot it with his bow and arrow.
Then he went to tell the others. All the people gathered at the carcass of the cow to eat it.
Later Karãǀʼtuma told the black people about the cow. (The black men were his younger brothers. For Karãǀʼtuma's parents first bore him, then bore a black man, and last of all gave birth to a European. All of you Europeans here are small children compared to us.) He told a black man about the cows, and the black man said, "Let's go have a look at these things." So they went to see the cows. As soon as the black man saw that the cows didn't run away like other animals he said, "Ai! A thing like this which doesn't fear you, you certainly don't want to kill. Let's make a kraal, and drive them into it, and see what will happen."
So they chopped down thorn trees and made a kraal and drove the cows into it. One of the cows gave birth in the kraal. So the black man took a thong and tied her hind legs, and she still just stood there. And he milked her, and brought the milk to Karãǀʼtuma.
"You've helped me find this cow, and now let's drink the milk together." But Karãǀʼtuma said, "Uh-uh, you eat first, and let me lick the pot!" That's what he said! "You eat first, and let me lick the pot!"
When I think about it, I want to kill him! It's a good thing he's already dead, because otherwise I'd be in jail for sure. If I had been there that day long ago, I would have killed him.
Well, the black man said, "Come on, let's eat! Lick the pot - what kind of talk is that?" But Karãǀʼtuma persisted, saying, "No, you eat your fill first, and let me scrape what's left off the sides of the pot."
So the black man ate, and Karãǀʼtuma licked the pot. When they were finished, Karãǀʼtuma picked up a leather thong. But the black man came and grabbed the other end of it, and they tugged at the thong to see who could pull it out of the other's hands. Finally, the black man got the thong away from Karãǀʼtuma. He gave Karãǀʼtuma a piece of string instead, saying, "You can use string to do whatever you have to do; I need the thong for my cows. You have nothing you need to tie up with leather thongs."
Karãǀʼtuma didn't refuse, but just took the string. Right there he should have put his foot down and fought the black man for the thong. But he didn't. He just took the string and started going about snaring animals with it. And the black man sat in comfort and milked his cows and drank the milk.
One day Karãǀʼtuma came across a cultivated field, a field of sorghum. He tried some, and the husks burnt his skin, made him itch. So he went into the field and started a fire, arid burned most of the field, leaving a few stalks standing. Then he went back to tell the black man what he had done. "I found some terrible things over there that burn your skin. So I set fire to them. But there are some left." And the black man said, "Let's go see." And when they got to the field, he said, "Are you crazy? This is sorghum; it's food, you fool. I'm going to take what's left home with me."
(Thus Karãǀʼtuma ruined us; that day he spoiled the chances of our people for all time.)
