NAF000347
ǀ'umaǀ'umane and the Goba saw some cows. The Goba was a rich man, and he said the cows were his. Now the cows had no pen. So the Goba told ǀ'umaǀ'umane to watch the cows for him in the bush. ǀ'umaǀ'umane sat down in the shade to watch them.
After awhile along came a second Goba. "Whose animals are these?" he asked.
"They're mine," replied ǀ'umaǀ'umane.
"Oh. Well, why don't we drive your animals back to the village rather than leave them out here in the bush?"
ǀ'umaǀ'umane agreed that would be a good idea. So they drove the cows home to the village. When they got there, one of the cows gave birth. The Goba said "Let's milk this animal and see how the milk tastes."
But ǀ'umaǀ'umane was afraid of the cow. "You tie her up - I'm afraid," he said. So the Goba took a leather thong and tied up the cow. Then he sat down and milked her until his bucket was full. Then he brought the milk to the fire. "Wash that pot standing there," he said to ǀ'umaǀ'umane. "Then cook the milk and let's taste it. Have you ever drunk this kind of milk before?"
"No, I've never tasted it," said ǀ'umaǀ'umane.
So he washed the pot as the Goba told him to, and began to cook the milk. The milk thickened into porridge. ǀ'umaǀ'umane took it off the fire and set it aside to cool. Then the Goba said "Come on, let's eat." But ǀ'umaǀ'umane said "No: you eat first and then give me the pot to lick." So the Goba ate and ate, and then picked up the pot and handed it to ǀ'umaǀ'umane. ǀ'umaǀ'umane sat down and scraped out the leavings from the sides of the pot.
Then they both stood up. ǀ'umaǀ'umane said, "Here, take this thong, and I'll grab hold of this string. Let's see which one of us can pull harder than the other one." ǀ'umaǀ'umane took the string end, and the Goba grasped the leather thong. They began a tug of war. They pulled and strained on the rope so that it snapped in two. ǀ'umaǀ'umane tumbled into the bush. The Goba fell in the other direction, toward the east. As he fell, he shouted after ǀ'umaǀ'umane, "Good riddance to you! These cows will henceforth belong to me. And you will bow down to me and be my servant."
Since that day ǀ'umaǀ'umane and the Goba have gone their separate way. The Goba eats meat and drinks milk. He plants sorghum and corn and eats those things too. But ǀ'umaǀ'umane has only bush food to eat, things like nǀn, komako, and ǃgwa berries. That's the story of how ǀ'umaǀ'umane lost his cows and became an inferior person.
