NAF000330
There was once a man called Heishe, and here is what he did. He was living at a certain place and doing a lot of hunting. One day when he had gone hunting, he saw a hole in the ground. He went to take a look at it and discovered there were animals living in it. They were baby porcupines. "I'm going to keep an eye on these children," thought Heishe. "I'm going to watch them every day until I catch a glimpse of their mother. Do these babies have a mother, I wonder?" He played with them for awhile, but the mother didn't return, so he left.
The next day he took care of them again, because he found them again in their burrow alone without their mother. "Hey! Today I'm going to take one of these babies home to taste. Are they animals?" While he was there watching them, this is what he was thinking. So he took one of the babies and went home. He ate it and then lay down to sleep. "Yes!" he thought. "This is where I'll live so I'll always have meat to eat because maybe the mother porcupine will give birth to another litter with as many babies as a dog has."
Then he just went and got another of the little porcupines. He cooked it and brought it back for his family to eat. Chills ran up his wives' spines when they saw it. As they ate they said to each other, "Yo! This husband of ours ... why is this guy so tricky? Why doesn't he bring it home raw so we can see it first? All he brings home is a little bit of boiled meat instead," The wives sat and talked about this together. They talked and wondered, and Heishe went back and forth bringing the bits of boiled meat home.
One day the mother porcupine asked the children, "Haven't I always told you to be careful? What's this? I went out for awhile, and one of you is gone!"
"We ... um ... there's something that comes while you're out and says, 'Children come out so I can see you!' When we come out, it looks after us and plays and plays with us and then takes one of us and runs off." Their mother heard them. Then she went out again leaving the babies alone. Again Heishe came to the burrow, came to see them. "Come out so I can see you!" The baby porcupines came out of their burrow. Heishe looked after them and played with them, and then he took another one of them and went off. Later he came back and did the same thing. Finally, only two babies were left.
Then the mother porcupine came home. She said, "Today there are only two of you left. Tomorrow I'm not going to go out at all. I don't want to hear any more of this foolishness about Heishe taking care of you while I'm gone. Let him try coming again. He'll see my eye shining back in the burrow, and he'll ask, 'Whose big eye is that?' Then you children will tell him about me. You'll say that it's your older sister's eye. Say she is sick and lying down inside the burrow. That's what you'll tell him." The baby porcupines heard their mother, and agreed to do what she said.
So they waited for awhile, and Heishe came again. He played with the two babies and almost did what he had done before. But then he saw a big eye shining back inside the burrow. "Whose eye is that?" he asked.
The little porcupines said, "Oh, those are our older sister's eyes."
"Why is your older sister just lying there sick—why doesn't she come out so we can talk?" The babies went into the hole as if to bring their sister out. They told their mother what Heishe had said. She ran out of the burrow and grabbed Heishe's scalp and ripped it open. The skin just hung down the back of his neck. Heishe cried and ran away from there as fast as he could go.
While he was running, he met up with the springhare, the springhare was cooking ǃgo. He cooked the ǃgo. The springhare cooked and Heishe watched. The cooking took a long time. Heishe got fidgety. Finally, he said, "Ai! This guy has kept me waiting too long," and he grabbed the springhare. He peeled the skin off him whole. Then he took the skin and covered the big wound the porcupine had made on his head. He covered his head and went off. He went home to his wives.
They lived for awhile, and then Heishe's head began to rot. The upper surface of the skin had hair, but he had filled up the hole in the head with springhare flesh. Because he mixed the two kinds of meat together, his own and springhare's, the wound began to fester. They went on living. And Heishe's head was rotting. They went on living. The maggots began to bite him. The wound festered. They went on living.
One day Heishe was drinking the fat of kwainshe birds. He drank and drank until the fat was dripping from his fingernails. He got fat all over his hands, and then he went and sat down. "How does a guy who smells like he does think he can get any women?" sniffed his wives. "What on earth does he have that smells so terribly today?"
"These people can see when a man is rich," said Heishe. "I'm so rich that fat is dripping from my fingernails. How then can they be talking about something smelly? Just look at my fingernails," he said to them. He shook-shook-shook fat off them into the fire and then pulled his hands back from the blaze. But the women could smell him, they smelled the scent of his rotting wound. "There is surely something wrong with this guy," they said.
They all went to sleep. While they slept, Heishe was killing the two wives with his smell. He killed them and killed them. When dawn broke, the wives said to each other, "Let's follow him and see what he does." That day he only went to a ǀxama tree and gathered its fruits. When he returned home, he said, "There is a ǀxama tree with ripe fruit, but it's very far from here. Let's go live near it so we'll have plenty to eat." So they got ready to move. The wives took one of their children aside and conferred with it in secret. "My child," said one of the women, "I who am your mother am asking you to do something for me. Today while we are walking, I want your father to carry you. Don't ask to be carried by your mother. When we get close to the bottom of the ǀxama tree, we want you to take off the skin he has on his head. Break it open so we can see what's smelling so bad. We want to know, because we've been wondering whether this man is a normal husband or not." The wives told the child all this in secret, the child of one of the wives and Heishe.
So they left their old camp. The child refused to be carried by its mother. "Today I want my father to carry me," it said. The father tried to convince it to go to its mother, but it refused. It refused absolutely. Finally, Heishe picked up the child and carried it. They walked and walked. When they drew near the tree, the child ripped the springhare skin off its father's head! It threw the skin away, and the maggots came tumbling down. Heishe threw the child from him and didn't come see where it landed. Then he ran away.
