NAF000324
Kauha wanted to get married. He asked one girl after another, but they all refused him. So he said to himself,
"All right. Just let them wait and see what I'm going to do to them." Then he went off and turned himself into a springbok. Next he died, and lay down out in the bush somewhere.
The women came that way gathering. They found the dead springbok lying in their path. "Oo, oo, oo! I've found a springbok!" cried the girl that Kauha had especially wanted to marry. "Hey, everybody, "I've found a springbok. Come here and let's pack it up to take home."
All the girls ran up to see. "But since we have no string, how will we carry it? How can we possibly carry such a big thing over our shoulders?"
"Don't worry," replied the first girl, "We'll just carry it in a kaross. We'll carry it to the camp and then go borrow a knife from someone and skin it."
Now in the group of girls there was one that Kauha did not desire. This girl volunteered to carry the springbok first. She stowed it firmly in her kaross. The heavy meat rode high on her back and she walked well. But as they walked, Kauha made himself very heavy. The kaross sagged, and in a short while the weight had completely defeated the girl. So she lay the bundle on the ground and called out to the first girl,
"Come on, you found this meat—now you carry it."
The first girl said, "Who says I'm refusing? Give it to me and help me get it on my back." The girls continued walking. As they walked, Kauha slipped downwards in the kaross until he lay directly behind her buttocks. Then he began to do it to her—he was "marrying" her. He slid down right into her crotch, and she cried "Ai! Why have you people placed this meat so it can slide down like it's doing? What am I doing wrong? Maybe I'm too short to carry this springbok. Maybe it's doing me this way because I'm too short."
The other girls said wearily, "just push it back up and let's go, hey? We know it's heavy, but why should we be the only ones to carry it?" Nonetheless, they helped her out: another girl came to her and carried it for awhile. With her, nothing happened, and they continued a long way along their path. When it was the first girl's turn again, she put the springbok back in her kaross. But as soon as she started to walk, Kauha slid down again and was "marrying" her. She would push him back up again, and he would slide back down again, and she would have to push him up again. "Hey!" she wondered. "What kind of meat is this?"
But she struggled on, and at last they arrived at the camp. The people were puzzled. "What meat is this that dies but is still alive like this seems to be?"
"It's meat we found lying in the bush. We've carried it home. But we don't know what this meat is up to: when some of us carry it, it's just fine, but when this girl tries to carry it, the meat does something awful to her. It's a terrible piece of meat."
"Can this be just a piece of meat?" the people wondered. "Is it just a piece of regular old meat?" The people all sat around and talked it over. At last they decided to skin it. When they skinned it, it turned out to have no blood and no guts. It was just a solid piece of meat, and it tasted bad. So they didn't eat it. "No," they said, "some terrible fever may have killed this animal. Something awful may have killed it, so that it tastes so foul. We just don't know about this meat." So they threw it away. That's what they did with the meat those girls had found.
