NAF000322
One day Kauha was out walking. He turned himself Into some fruits called ǂnǂdwa; they hung thickly on the ǂnǂdwa bushes and dangled in the breeze. They weren't regular ǂnǂdwa: they were really Kauha.
(Q. Didn't you say yesterday that he turned himself into kitwa? A. He turned himself into all kinds of things: sometime he was kitwa, sometimes ǂnǂdwa. Then he'd be kitwa again.)
When he had turned into ǂnǂdwa the girl he liked came along and began to gather the fruit. She gathered ǂnǂdwa and gathered ǂnǂdwa, but all along it wasn't ǂnǂdwa but Kauha instead who had turned himself into ǂnǂdwa fruit. He had gone right inside the #nǀdwa pods and turned himself into ǂnǂdwa.
Well, the girl came along and gathered the fruit and ate it. When she had continued on her way with the other women, Kauha called out from inside her stomach, "ǀẽǀẽ! How shall I get out of here? (Since Kauha was a magic person, a strange person, his voice was lisping (tsxi-tsxi); he was an inferior being.)
When she heard him, the girl said, "Xi! What kind of thing can be inside my stomach trying to jump out?
Then Kauha said "ǀẽǀẽ! I'm going to come out this way!" And as the women continued on their way, he laughed, "Hom!" way down inside the girl's belly.
The girl was startled. "What's doing me this way today?" Then Kauha would be quiet for awhile. The women would keep on walking. Then he'd go "Hom!" again, and the girl would wonder "What's the matter with me?" Then she would walk on.
She walked until Kauha cried "ǀẽǀẽ! Hooray for me!" The girl was beside herself. She had never heard of such a thing. "Yo!" she cried. "What is this, what can be doing this to me?" At last Kauha came out. He went "Xa!" through the wall of her stomach and jumped out; and walked away.
What do you think the girl did to him then? She left that place and went somewhere else and made a pile of her sexual secretions. She made a pile of that drippy stuff I was telling you about yesterday. When Kauha came along and saw it, he said "Koo, koo, koo, what's this good stuff?" He jumped toward it and, losing his balance, went "ǃgwi!" right into the middle of it. Well, he began to cry. He wailed and lamented and nearly died crying. "Where am I?" he wondered.
When he had finally climbed out of the stuff, Kauha went and played another trick! He turned himself into kitwa. He hung from vines and dangled in the wind. The girl came along and picked the kitwa. She ate it until her stomach was so big she looked pregnant. But all the while it wasn't kitwa—it was really Kauha. He lay inside her stomach wall and went "Hom!"
"What's that?" she asked herself.
"Hom!" he went again. At last he left her stomach by popping out through her stomach wall.
