NAF000302
ǃGara sired two sons, one named ǃXoma, the other named Kanǁa.
Once the two boys were chasing an eland. ǃGara followed their tracks but did not catch up with them. He had with him the tortoise, and the two of them were following Khaǁʼan and ǃXoma. ǃGara and the tortoise came to the remains of a fire where the boys had slept along the way. ǃGara told the tortoise to stick his head in the fire to see whether the centre was cold. The tortoise stuck in his head and left it there a while, then told ǃGara that the fire was dead.
So they kept on tracking and tracking until they saw another old fire. Again ǃGara told the tortoise to stick in his head and feel the heat. The tortoise left his head in the ashes a while but at last reported that this fire, too, was dead.
Again they tracked the boys. When night fell they came to the place where the eland had died. They came to the fire the boys had lit the day before, the fire they had lit when they killed the eland. This time the tortoise put his head into the fire and cried "dzi dzi dzi dzi!" 
ǃGara said, "My father's namesake, hooray for you!" They had come very close to where the boys were, so that the tortoise had burned his head in a living fire.
ǃGara and the tortoise jumped up and ran, ran to where the eland had been butchered. There they found that lions had been making waterbags of the eland's stomach. They had taken out the eland's stomach, and had made waterbags of it. With the chyme from the stomach the lions had made a pile to bury Kanǁa and ǃXoma. (That's what lions do. Lions kill a thing to eat, and they bury its chyme in the sand.) Yes, the lions had made eland waterbags for fetching water. 
ǃGara came up to the pile of chyme and saw his sons imprisoned in it. "ǃXoma and Kanǁa - is this you here?" 
They said, "Yes, here we are." Then ǃGara went to hang the bones from the back of the eland's neck in a tree. He meant to make lightning, this fire which comes down from the sky with the sound "huru!" ǃGara hung the bones in a tree. 
He hung them up, but they fell down and went "ǁoh" in the sand. "No," he said, "these bones won't do." So he went and hung up the horns instead. The horns stood up straight and stayed there. In this way ǃGara was calling the lightning to come and kill the lions. 
When he had hung up the horns, ǃGara moved off a little way and gathered small birds together, gathered them so they could speak to him. He tied the birds all around his head and they cried, "khwai, khwai, khwai!" 
He untied them and said, "Why do these things chatter so much?" ǃGara threw the birds away. Next he took the little bird tshwe and tied him on his head, and sat down to wait for the lions. 
After he had sat a while, ǃGara made the night come. He spoke to the night, saying, "ǀeǀe! Grow dark so the lions, who have gone to fetch water, will have to return." It grew dark, and the lions returned. They came up to ǃGara and offered him water. They gave him the biggest waterbag, but he refused it. "Give me that little waterbag over there, let me just sip a little, so that the water will go around," he said. Then he took the biggest waterbag and gave it to the tortoise. They all drank and drank and drank. 
Then ǃGara said, "Now that you have finished, let's eat." So the lions cut the fat from the carcass and they all ate. Next ǃGara said, "We're going to dance. Let's dance, so it will rain." ǃGara led off and the tortoise came behind him. The lions came behind the tortoise. ǃGara said to the lions, "Now you two dance together; don't separate. The tortoise and I will also dance close to each other, so that there will be a space between us and you lions." 
So they danced and danced and the dance began to be strong. "Now descend!" bellowed ǃGara. And the lightning came down - "hobo!" and struck the lions flat. ǃGara called out, "ǃXoma, you and Khaǁʼan come out and help me beat these pawed things!" The boys came out of the pile and ran to their father's side to help him beat the lions. 
Then ǃGara stood back and said in surprise "What will I do now ... how will I powder myself with sã so my brains won't be spoiled by this killing I've done?" So he went and got the eland's hoof. He put coals in it and took a big whiff of the smoke - "he-e-eh." But it didn't work, he didn't go into a trance. So he said, "No good. What kind of dried up, tasteless thing is this?" He walked back and forth thinking. Finally he killed the tortoise, his nephew who had accompanied him. He grabbed the tortoise so he shrieked "ee!" and snapped his neck in two. Then ǃGara scooped out the meat from the shell. He took eland fat and poked it into the shell. He put in the fat and heaped coals on top of it and sniffed the smoke, and this time he began to trance. 
He rubbed fat on himself and rubbed fat on himself and rubbed fat on his arms. Then ǃGara and his sons began to eat the eland. Nanamitagum ate all that was given to him; he kept stretching out his hand and eating what was put into it over and over again. Each time he finished a morsel, ǃGara would have to take another piece of roast meat out of the coals, knock the ashes off, and give it to Nanamitagum. Nanamitagum ate and ate, and after a while, the meat was all gone.
ǃGara went off alone and asked himself, "Now that this guy has eaten all the meat, what will I give my sons to eat? Why did Nanamitagum eat it all up?" ǃGara then removed his own anos. He pulled it right out and chopped it off and carried it home. Kanǁa and ǃXoma tried to eat it but it refused. The two boys were surprised. "What is this our father has brought home?" they wondered. They would pull a piece of it out of the coals and knock the ashes off, but it was hard and would refuse to soften when thaey beat it with a stick. Then the piece would leap out of their hands and vanish into ǃGara's asshole. Kanǁa and ǃXoma were left to wonder what kind of meat their father had brought them.
