NAF000304
The kori bustard refused the jackal and married the python instead. The kori bustard said, "All right now, everybody, I'm the kori bustard" and I'm going to marry this girl, the python." So the kori bustard married the python. They lived together for a very long time. But the jackal was saying to herself all this while, "Oh! Here's this man with such a wonderful headfeather! I wish my older sister would die so I could marry her fine husband!" Then one day all the women went gathering. But the jackal refused to accompany them, saying to the python, "Sister, let's go draw water from the spring. Your husband is away, so let's go fetch water and bring it home." So the two of them walked to the spring. A big nǂa tree stood near it. Its broad shadow fell over the well, and one of its branches was stretched out above the water.
This was the branch that broke and fell into the spring that day, carrying the python along with it. The jackal and her older sister arrived at the spring. The jackal said, "Climb that tree and knock down the fruit. If you fall, I'll catch you." But the python said, "You're a strong girl, climb the tree yourself and knock down the nǂa so we can eat. You're a young girl, a child - go on, climb the nǂa tree and shake down its fruit so we can eat." "No!" said the jackal, "you're the one to do it; you're soft and slippery, and you can slide along the nǂfa branches so well. Go on, you climb it. Do you think so badly of me as to imagine that if you climb and fall I won't catch you? I'll watch you and run back and forth beneath you as you climb and then jump to catch you as you come down." At last the python agreed. She slithered, and climbed, and slithered beautifully up the tree. When she came to the branch lying over the spring she went out on it to knock the fruit down. She shook the branch, and the nǂa fell down on the ground. The python ate some of the fruit up in the tree, and the jackal ate the rest down on the ground. Then the python began to move out upon the branch so that she could reach another branch. But she lost her grip! Her smooth body slipped off the branch and she fell into the spring. "ǃgo-e!" was the sound that she made. Her sister the jackal ran home to their camp. She went to her sister's husband and said, "Come and see! My older sister has fallen out of the nǂa tree!" At that, everyone wailed, "If she has fallen out of the nǂa tree, what will we do?"
When night fell, everyone just went to bed. The python's husband went to his house, and there was the jackal, pretending to be his wife. The kori bustard told her to spread out their sleeping-skins for the night. Secretly he stood bone arrows upright in the sand beneath her sleeping-place. She lay down on top of them, and began to complain that the place was thorny. But her sister used to sleep in the same place, so she had to be content. An arrow pricked her and she died in her sleep. Her anus protruded from her and stood out from her back. The kori bustard said, "Hey, everybody, what's happened to the good wife I married recently? Why is it that today so many nǂa seeds are sticking in her asshole?"
He stood beside the dead jackal crying for his lost wife. He mourned for her loud and long. The people said, "Get together, everyone. Let's go pull his wife out of the spring for him and bring her home. What makes you think we won't be able to get her out?" The kori bustard said, "How can she possibly get out? I'm just never going to see her again." But the others said to him, "Gather lots of people together, tell everyone to come together and help you get her out. Call the wildebeests, call all the animals, whatever their names are. Gather them all together so they can work on trying to get her out." The kori bustard said, "How can they help? Who will be able to reach her? All of us are too short: everyone's legs are too short to reach her, since she's so far down. Who will be able to get to her? If you go down that far, you'll never see the sky again. You'll go right down to the bottom and never come up again. A person might never see daylight again! That's how far down the python is."
But the next morning the kori bustard got up and went to the spring. He gathered all the animals together: the giraffes, the wildebeests, the springhares, the gemsboks - all the many animals, all the animals there are. He called them together, and told them to come to the spring. He called the female animals and he called the male animals. He told them that yesterday the python had sunk to the bottom of the water. He gathered them together and called and gathered them, and there were female animals and male animals who collected at the spring. As many as there are animals came, and they spread as far as the eye could see. The sight of them was something to behold.
Then one by one they came forward to try their luck. Each one would stick in his leg and reach down into the spring. But each one failed to go all the way to the bottom, and they all drew back their legs at about halfway down. Each one said, "I can't figure out a way to do it." The gemsbok stepped forward and put in his leg. It went down, down, down - and he almost fell in. So he pulled back his leg and stepped aside. Then the wildebeest stepped up and tried it. But he, too, nearly fell into the water. So he drew his leg out too. The kudu tried next. He put his foot in and nearly tumbled in himself, so he pulled it back out again. As many as there were animals, as many animals as have names, that's how many tried and failed.
All this while the giraffe just stood there, and so did the ostrich. The ostrich came forward then, and put in his legs. He sat down at the edge of the well and stretched his legs down and down and down. With the very tip of one claw he was able to scratch the python. "Mm," he said, "I got pretty close to her. It felt to me as if my fingertip was touching something. Why doesn't that long fellow over there come forward and find out if it's really the python I'm feeling?" At this the giraffe drew himself up very tall. "If that guy tries it," said the ostrich, "he's bound to get the woman out. That woman will get out if the giraffe reaches down for her!" Then the kori bustard said, "Mm, the rest of us will go back to camp to look for things to spread out on the ground to receive her. We'll spread mats from the well to the village." So he and the others went to do that. Many of the animals said, "Aah, this will never come true."
But others replied, "Don't talk like that. Just be silent. They've gone to fetch mats and they'll come back and spread them out. Then you'll see what the giraffe can do." - No! The kori bustard didn't call for mats to be spread first. First the giraffe stuck his foot into the spring! Down, down, down, down, it went. At the bottom it reached the python. The giraffe took hold of her and felt her all over. Then he withdrew his leg and said to the others, "I've put my leg all the way down and it feels like there's more than one python down there." The python had given birth in the bottom of the spring. "Now go to the camp," said the giraffe, "and find something to spread out on the ground. Then bring them back here and fix them nicely." When they heard the giraffe's words, everybody laughed and grabbed each other in delight and fell to the ground. "How has this fellow managed to do it?" they asked each other.
Then they ran back to the camp and began to spread mats from the camp to the spring. Then the giraffe stepped out of the crowd again. He rocked backwards and forwards on his long legs as he approached the spring. He reached in with his leg, and reached and stretched right down to the bottom. He grasped the python and shook the mud off her while she was still down there. Then he opened his mouth and laughed! He began bringing her up and up and up toward the surface. It was a very deep spring! It was a fearsome spring, and a deep waterhole. As the python came near the surface, the other animals saw her and hugged each other. They fell to the ground laughing. The giraffe brought her up, and lifted her to the surface. At last he laid her on the ground. She lay there and vomited up water. Then the giraffe pulled a baby python out of the spring and laid it beside its mother.
The animals were so delighted that they embraced each other and rolled on their backs on the ground. "Here's our beautiful girl again," they said, "what the jackal did was a terrible thing." Then they brought a whisk to wipe her face. "ǃGa!" it went across her brow, and they said, "Yes, isn't this the woman we were looking for the other day? And today she's come up out of the spring, and here she is." Then they greeted her and embraced her and exclaimed over her. "Yes, this is a very good thing the giraffe has done for us." Then the python walked on the trail of mats with her child back to the camp. She walked beautifully and gracefully back home to her own house. "Yes! It's our own daughter again," said the people of the camp. "Here she is, and that jackal over there is dead, and good riddance." The kori bustard greeted his wife and said, "Oh, my good wife, today you've come home to me!" She glided regally and smoothly like she always had, and she sat down before her house and looked around at everyone. Later she took her child to bed and they both slept well for a long time. The people said, "Mm. This is the right woman. This is the daughter of our camp for sure. She fits in with the camp so well, and she's so very beautiful."
So the people lived there together. After a while they separated and traveled around to different places. The kori bustard's heart was so happy that he ran about tossing his head feather. He ran and tossed his head feather in praise of his wife. And the two of them went on living. Mm, yes, that's how it was. My friend, that's how it happened.
