NAF000346
The man who saw the first cattle was a man people call ǀʹumaǀʹuma. When he saw them he thought they were wild animals. He saw their calves lying where their mothers left them when they went to graze. He killed one of the calves, and brought it home for everyone to see. "Oh!" said ǀʹumaǀʹuma's relatives. "What are these strange things ǀʹumaǀʹuma has killed? If we kill these little animals, he says, they won't run away from us. They'll just lie there and all we have to do is walk up and kill them." The people lived at that place and discussed the strange animals.
Then one day a Batswana came to the camp and said to ǀʹumaǀʹuma, "Come show me these little animals that don't run away when you hunt them. I never heard of any such animals." So the two of them walked and walked until they came to where the calves were. The mother cows had gone off grazing and had left their calves lying in the grass. ǀʹumaǀʹuma and the Batswana watched them for awhile, and then sat down to wait for their mothers. They spent the day sitting there waiting for the cows to return. When the sun began to go down they heard the cows approaching. They were calling to their calves in the grass. The Batswana whispered, "Is that their mothers coming back?"
Well, the cows returned. Their calves got to their feet and began to suck their mothers' milk. "Do you see those things?" demanded the Batswana. "Let's see what we can do with them." He whistled. The cows only turned their heads and looked at them; they didn't run away. The jũǀwa was afraid of them, but the Batswana said, "You know, I think if we do things right, we can fix these animals so they'll never get away." So they decided to camp nearby. They built a fire. The cows saw the fire and lay down where they were. The Batswana said to the jũǀwa "See? If we take good care of these animals we'll have plenty of them as long as we want." The two men stayed near the cattle and kept watch over them. One day the Batswana said "Let's build pens for the cows to sleep in." So they cut thorn branches and built pens for their cattle.
ǀʹumaǀʹuma and the Batswana stayed at that place for a long time.
They were there at the dark of the moon, and they were there when the moon was born again and shone at night. One morning the Batswana milked a cow. He cooked the milk and said to the other man, "Hey, ǀʹumaǀʹuma! Come on, let's eat."
ǀʹumaǀʹuma answered "You eat first and let me lick the pot."
"What are you talking about? Why don't both of us eat together?" said the other. "Both of us are people."
But ǀʹumaǀʹuma refused, and said again "You eat, and I'll lick the pot." So the Batswana ate, and ǀʹumaǀʹuma licked the pot. Then the one who ate first told ǀʹumaǀʹuma to clean out the pot. He told him to herd the cattle. ǀʹumaǀʹuma had become a servant to the other man. The other man became the cattle owner.
So they were master and servant and lived together that way. They lived at that place as master and servant, and the cows calved and they drank their milk.
Now the owner of the cows was the Batswana, and the other man was the jũǀwa. The Batswana became a rich man. He and ǀʹumaǀʹuma tended the cattle and watched over them. The cattle multiplied so that many people were able to own cattle.
Then one day they saw some sorghum growing. ǀʹumaǀʹuma said "Ugh! What are these awful, hairy plants? I don't want anything to do with them." He began to set the field afire to kill the sorghum. But the Batswana said "I'm a Batswana. These sorghum plants are something I'm going to keep and cultivate. Just as I keep cattle and take care of them, I'm going to take care of these plants and have them for food."
Then he and ǀʹumaǀʹuma began to have a tug of war with a rope. One end of the rope was made of fibre string and the other was a leather thong. ǀʹumaǀʹuma took the string end and the Batswana took the thong. They pulled and pulled. The rope snapped in two. ǀʹumaǀʹuma got the string end. Ever since then he has used the string to set snares for animals. But the Batswana got the leather thong. Since then he has used it to tie up his cows when he milks them.
