NAF000316
ǃXõǁəmdima and her mother were living with ǃXõǁəmdima's husband. They all went and lived in a certain place and finally left there and came to a new place and camped. ǃXõǁəmdima's husband annoyed his mother-in-law, and presently his small child told him that his mother-in-law had insulted him.
So the son-in-law came to her and killed her. He killed her while ǃXõǁəmdima was out gathering bush food. When she came back to camp and saw what had happened, she killed her husband. Then she took his shoes, shoes like these I'm wearing, took her husband's shoes and flung them into the sky. She took her mother's shoes too, and flung them into the sky. The shoes flew away and changed themselves. They became vultures, vultures that flap their wings up and down. They were vultures, and they came and feasted upon the two bodies.
Now the husband's younger brother had been behind them on the trail. When he followed their tracks and caught up with them the first thing he saw was the vultures. "What are these things that flap their wings and fly away—vultures? Let's go see!" He wondered, "What are these vultures after?" So he came up to the vultures and was very shocked when he saw his brother's body. Then he noticed the mother-in-law's body and was shocked again. He asked "What can have killed these people?" The younger brother and his people asked themselves this question over and over.
Meanwhile ǃXõǁəmdima had picked up her child and left. The "boy had refused over and over to leave his father and grandmother, but she took him with her anyway. ǃXõǁəmdima left her old mother lying there and fled to her grandparents. She and her son lived at the grandparents' village.
One day while they were living there, her husband's younger brother came to visit. He said that he wanted to marry ǃXõǁəmdima. But it was all trickery. He deceived her and stole her away from her grandparents. Then he killed her to avenge the death of his brother. But before she left, ǃXõǁəmdima had said to her grandmother "Do you see this heart of mine? As sure as we stand here this moment, when the sun has fallen towards afternoon you will see something shoot towards you like an arrow, and it will be my heart. Don't speak a word, just take it."
And the grandmother did as she was told, took ǃXõǁəmdima's heart and put it in a pouch. She put it in a pouch and it lay there and grew. It grew until it was a person again, a good, full-sized young woman. It was ǃXõǁəmdima herself again, and she sat in her grandmother's camp just as before.
Next the elephant said that he would marry this beautiful girl when she was of age. One day he came and took her away. Now the elephant had discovered water but he was keeping it a secret. He drank the water alone, and did not tell ǃXõǁəmdima and her people. But ǃXõǁəmdima saw what he was doing, and she told her brothers. Her brothers were the ǃgashehmsi, the little birds that cry "shaba, shaba!" before it rains and cry "shau!" after the rain has come. ǃXõǁəmdima stood in a crowd of these birds and accused the elephant of stinginess. The elephant attacked her in the midst of her brothers, grabbed her and said he would kill her. But her brothers came to her rescue and killed the elephant. They speared him and stabbed him over and over, so that the people who were watching cried "Aha, the spears, the spears, the spears!" They took that enormous thing and knocked him down dead. That elephant came to an end right there.
Then ǃXõǁəmdima changed herself into something else, and became a steenbok. Her heart became a steenbok, the steenbok that the jũǀwasi shoot and take home to cook and eat. The steenbok was once a person's heart, ǃXõǁəmdima's heart.
That's how it was long ago. The old people told us this and we listened and said to ourselves, "Ah, so that's how people used to be."
