NAF000319
The girl I first told you about yesterday, ǃXõǁəmdima, was taken to live with the elephants. Later she was married to the hyena. ǃXõǁəmdima and the hyena lived for awhile at the hyena's camp. But the elephants had made the hyena promise to bring her home to visit them. So one day the two of them were on their way to the elephant's camp.
As they neared the camp, they saw many tracks. "What can have been walking around here with feet like lions' feet, making tracks like these?" the hyena asked his wife.
"These aren't lion tracks; they're the tracks of my brothers. Quit talking like that."
"We are standing in the midst of lion tracks, yet you don't agree we should turn back and go home?" squeaked the hyena in fear.
"Good grief. These are the tracks of my father and his sons. They're out hunting. Come on, let's go on into camp. Stop such foolish talk. Lion? What lion? It's only my little brothers and sisters," said ǃXõǁəmdima. So they walked and walked and finally arrived at the camp. They sat down to visit the women who were there. They talked together for awhile. Then when ǃXõǁəmdima and the hyena went to fix a sleeping place for themselves, they were roared at by lions. It was her brothers, and they were roaring ferociously. "Ku - ku – ku!" said the hyena. "Are there lions coming?"
"Yo!" answered ǃXõǁəmdima. "You know perfectly well it's my brothers, my father's own flesh and blood who are coming home. So why are you calling them lions?"
"No, it's lions. Some on, let's ..." But the brothers were already coming into the camp. Since they were carnivores, they were barking. They barked like regular dogs bark. It had been a long time since they had seen their older sister, so they greeted her over and over. She ran to meet them, and they all embraced each other. "See, here are my brothers, just as I told you. What did you mean with all that talk?" she said to the hyena. "It was my brothers all along, so why don't you just shut up and sit quietly?"
"Yo!" said the hyena. "I'm in a camp full of lions and you say I shouldn't be afraid?"
"Oo-oo, it's only my brothers, silly! What do you mean— lions?"
Now, ǃXõǁəmdima 's father still had not come home. He was approaching the camp, and he let out a bellow so big that the whole countryside trembled and the trees nearly fell over. "Koo! I'm as good as dead!" said the hyena. "Why didn't I stay at home? What am I doing coming right into an elephant's house and making him bellow like this?"
"Yo!" said ǃXõǁəmdima. "It's only my father coming in. Now just sit down and wait patiently." And she sat him back down. "Here, eat this nǂa." The hyena was trembling terribly. He shivered and shook. So ǃXõǁəmdima went to get a tortoiseshell powder box. She pretended she was going to calm his nerves with sã powder. But what she did was to grab his nose and break it off! She broke her husband's nose off! "I told you to sit still and wait for my father, but you wouldn't, so I've broken your nose for you."
