NAF000299
One day long ago Kãǁka and ǃXoma went to the waterhole. They sat by the water with anger in their hearts against the person who had killed their older brother. They lay in wait for her there. The one who had killed their brother was the beautiful ǃeuǃeua. They waited for her by the waterhole.
After awhile, they heard someone coming down to the water. Kãǁka said to his younger brother, "Here she comes." But ǃXoma contradicted him, saying, "Yo! When ǃeuǃeua comes down you'll know her by the sound of her approach. Do you think ǃeuǃeua is so poor that we will not hear the clinking of her bracelets and her anklets? There will be no doubt about it when she comes."
So they waited until they heard "nǀenu, nǀenu, nǀenu, nǀenu"; she came down with her bangles clinking. Kãǁka's heart leaped in fear and he said again, "Here she comes!" ǃXoma scolded his brother and said, "Don't get excited, just stay down and wait. You're acting like a child. Even though I'm younger than you are, I'm not afraid. What's gotten into you?"
ǃeuǃeua came down and sat by the waterhole. The brothers got up and dipped some muddy water and gave it to her to drink. She refused it, saying: "Give me sweet, clean water. I've been walking a long way and am very thirsty. Let me drink. Anybody but you two would know enough to give me clean water." So they gave her clean water and she sat and was drinking it.
Now ǃeuǃeua had already warned her grandmother that morning, saying, "Grandma, when I go down to the waterhole today and don't return, and a little wind comes back to you, you'll know that I have died." Hearing the girl's words, her grandmother had already softened a gemsbok pouch in readiness, softened it and shook it out and laid it aside.
Meanwhile ǃeuǃeua was drinking the clean water, and as she drank, the spears of the two brothers met inside her body. And a little wind left her body as she died. The brothers tried to grab the wind but it got away. It went back to the village. There ǃeuǃeua's grandmother took the little thing and put it in the gemsbok pouch. It stayed and stayed in there and grew inside the pouch. The people continued to live at that place and it continued to grow. They kept on living there and eating there as long as there were things to eat.
Kãǁka and ǃXoma finished their work at the waterhole and ran off to hide because they were afraid.
And the drops of ǃeuǃeua's blood that were in the little wind lay in the pouch and grew. And they grew and grew until they became a person. When the person was finished it came out; the grandmother spread out a skin, in the late afternoon she spread a skin and took out the girl and sat her upon it.
Then the other people of the village came around. And ǃeuǃeua laughed, "ǃeu ǃeu ǃeu ǃeu!" Hearing this, her daughter said, "That's my mother laughing!" But another girl contradicted her, saying, "Face like a tsĩ-bean face! How can you have seen your mother? How can you talk like that when my older sister is dead and my heart is so heavy with grief?" And another girl said "How can you talk this way when you know my aunt is dead and my heart is heavy with grief?"
But they came and saw her sitting there, splendid and full-grown. Her daughter said, "There's my mother!" And ǃeuǃeua's younger sister said, "There's my sister sitting there!" And they were happy together.
Then one day those two brothers who had killed ǃeuǃeua came to take her in marriage. They came again, came to the village and spent the night. In the morning, ǃeuǃeua packed her things as if to leave with them. She packed bowls full of morningstar thorns. She packed bowls of rain. She packed devil's-claw thorn bowls. She packed ǃgoǂtobe thornbush, she packed whatever-ǃki thornbush stumps ... Then ǃeuǃeua took her baby daughter, who was a guinea fowl, and put her on her back in her kaross. But she turned the baby to face backwards, so that she could watch out for her mother's pursuers.
And ǃeuǃeua fled from the village with her daughter on her back. And Kanǁka and ǃXoma left the village in pursuit of them. And they chased her and chased her and soon they were catching up with her. So she began to strew morningstar thorns in their path. She ran on and after awhile asked her daughter, "Where are they now?" The baby answered, "Zenenene! They're almost close enough to grab my forelock!" So ǃeuǃeua strewed more thorns. Kãǁka and ǃXoma were caught in the middle of the thorns, and it took them a long time to make their way out. But finally they reached the end of the thorns and began to pursue her again.
And soon they caught up with her a second time. ǃeuǃeua didn't see them, so she asked her daughter, "Where have they gone?" "Zenenene! They're very close now and are about to grab my forelock!" This time, ǃeuǃeua strewed big devil's-claw thorns.
After a long time, Kãǁka and ǃXoma came through those thorns too. Then they crept up e-e-ever so softly until they were almost upon her! ǃeuǃeua said to her daughter, "Why are you so quiet? Tell me where they are!" So the little guinea fowl said, "Mother, look! They've caught up with us!" So ǃeuǃeua began to strew ǃki thorns, nǁana thorns (those little acacias that grow thickly together), ǃki stumps—she dropped them all so they lay in the path.
Soon Kãǁka and ǃXoma found themselves in the middle of the thorns again. But they kept on following her anyway. They followed her until ǃeuǃeua had dropped all her thorns and had no more.
Next she took out a little raincloud and hung it in the sky, a raincloud full of hail. She shot it into the sky, where it stuck fast. And Kãǁka and ǃXoma ran on and on, and soon came to where the cloud was hanging. ǃeuǃeua asked her daughter, "Where are they now?" And the baby said, "They're very close", so ǃeuǃeua commanded the cloud to come down. And even though it was a little cloud it made everything so dark that the two brothers couldn't see a thing. "Dzup!", the cloud descended between ǃeuǃeua and her pursuers. Thus they didn't see which way she went, didn't see that she went on ahead where it was dry and no rain was falling.
And the little cloud began to drop hail. And the hail broke the strings of Kãǁka and ǃXoma's loincloths, so they just stood there naked. And the bows and arrows they had, with which they had been stalking her, just fell apart, beaten by the hail and rain.
So the brothers and the rain went back to their village together. And there the rain danced with them and danced with them and danced with them and made their things fall apart and ruined everything they had.
ǃeuǃeua escaped and they did not know where she had gone. 
