NAF000462
In the beginning of things, a long, long time ago, when the men and women of the early race lived upon the earth, so my father told me, the men lived by hunting and the women by gathering grass seeds. They lived on opposite sides of a big river. In this river there grew a great quantity of reeds, in which the women gathered the seeds. One day the men went out shooting with their bows and poisoned arrows and killed a springbuck. They had no fire to cook the meat, as they had carelessly let their fire go out. They were not like the women, who always carried some fire, and did things nicely. The men often took a long time get the fire alight again. This day they were so hungry that they could not wait, and so they sent one of their number down to the river to get some fire from the women. Now there were five of them. When the man got down to the river, and went across, he found a woman amongst the reeds gathering grass seeds, and he asked her for some fire. She said to him: "Come to my place, and I will give you some." When they arrived at the village they went into one of the huts, and the woman told him to wait until she had crushed the grass seeds, and then she would give him some fire. So he sat down and waited. The woman got her stone and pounded up the seeds; then she put the seeds into a pot and made some porridge. After it was cooked she gave some of it to the man, and he asked her what it was, and she said it was porridge. "Well," said he, "it is very nice food, and I shall just stay with you." So he did not go back to his companions with the fire. 
After waiting a long time, the men, who were beginning to feel hungry by this time, sent another of their number down to the river to get fire. He also met a woman gathering grass seeds, and he told her he had come for some fire. She told him to wait until her return to her hut, when she would give him some fire. He <pb n="79">waited. She also made some porridge, and gave him a share of it, and he said the food was nice, so he quite forgot to go back with the fire. 
Next a third man was sent with the same message. He also got down to the river and found a woman amongst the reeds. He told her he had come to get some fire, for their own fire had gone out, and they were very hungry. He did not say anything about the other two men, as he was so very much afraid. The woman said to him: "If you will come to my village I will give you some fire." He went with her, and she made some fire and cooked porridge. He was quite pleased with the food, and said it was very nice. So he also quite forgot to go back with the fire. 
Now there were only two men left. They began to get very frightened. They did not know why their companions had not come back with the fire. There were many evil spirits in those days, and they thought their friends might be killed. They began to quarrel, and one of them said to the other: "Wait here till I go and try to get some fire from the women over yonder." So he went away: the other man waited. But he met a woman near the river, and he returned with her to her village, and did not come back to his companion. By this time many days had gone by, and the springbuck was getting quite rotten, for it was very hot weather, and the last man was getting very hungry. So he waited a long time, but his friend never came back. He took up his bow and arrows and fled into the far country, and was lost altogether. This is how marriage came amongst men and women, and it is the end of the tale. 
