NAF000337
The story of ǃʹõǃʹõ? I don't know it and I do know it ... The great god, the great god people call ǃGara was the one who spread out the land for us in the beginning. And the ǃʹõǃʹõ bird went about gathering honey. He would go looking for honey and when he found some he would fly into the tree and chop it out. He'd chop it out and then go sit on the ground with it. Along would come ǃGara who always sat down to beg for honey. But ǃʹõǃʹõ would pick up the pieces of bark he brought the honey down in and leave ǃGara sitting there and just go away with them.
Now one day ǃGara found some honey of his own. He found it himself and chopped it out of the tree. And this time it was ǃʹõǃʹõ who came to sit and beg for honey. ǃGara went up and down the tree several times. Of course he couldn't do it as easily as ǃʹõǃʹõ could. The third time he had almost made it up the tree, when suddenly he fell down and his stomach split open. The ǃʹõǃʹõ came and took the honey containers and ran off with them. ǃGara lay there with his stomach split open. Then little flies gathered all over him and began to repair his stomach, (You know how flies do?) They came and lay their little hands flat on his stomach and sewed it up for him. They sewed up his belly button and sewed up the skin over his liver. When he was all sewed together, ǃGara thanked them saying, "My nephews have saved me." Then he got up and was fine. Yes, that's what happened.
One day Kauha's wives turned into kitwa fruits. But before they did that, they played another trick on him. This is what they did: the wives made a baby giraffe. They made it and from their sexual secretions; stood it up in the bush. They made the baby giraffe, and then went home to tell Kauha. "We found a baby giraffe out in the bush. Tomorrow you can go and kill it." All night they wives sat and fidgeted, waiting impatiently for the sun to come up. "When is it going to be morning so he can go kill that baby giraffe?" they said to each other.
Finally dawn broke, and they set off. When Kauha first saw the giraffe, he wanted to beat it to death. But his wives said, "You don't beat a baby giraffe! If you do, you'll break its skin, and the blood will all spill. Just jump and kill it with your bare hands. Just leap and grab it." Kauha was surprised at their request, but he jumped to grab it anyway. "ǃKum!" He fell right into the middle of the pile of sexual secretions. He swam around helplessly there, and his wives ran off and left him.
The women ran away and turned into kitwa and were dangling from vines. They swung in the breeze and ripened. Meanwhile, Kauha had finally gotten out of the pile of muck and had come after his wives. He saw the ripe kitwa hanging on their vines, and so he picked them and ate them. When he had swallowed them, the wives lay in his stomach and said "huh!"
"I hear you!" said Kauha. "I know you're there! I hear you!" Then along came a very small bird called a ǂdoru, who pecked Kauha's stomach open. The bird flew away, and the wives jumped out. Yes, that's how it happened.
