NAF000300
Kauha is miffed one day because the women are eating roasted ǁxaru bulbs and only giving him raw ones to eat. So he takes his brother-in-law, and the two go out into the bush to gather their own ǁxaru so they can roast them. Kauha persuades ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi ["Eyes-on-his-Ankles"] they should gather the ǁxaru with the tops still on. They gather a hunting-bag full and come home and lay it aside.
Now this brother-in-law's face is empty — he has no eyes. He and Kauha start playing ti [a game]. ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi beats Kauha over and over. He continues to win because his eyes are on his ankles, close to the action! ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi keeps digging out the sand from the right holes all the time.
They play and play, and Kauha goes on losing. He begins to wonder how, if this guy has no eyes, he can win all the time. When they finish playing, ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi lies down to take a nap. When he is fast asleep, Kauha flicks sand in his face to see whether he will blink. Nothing happens. So he flicks sand on his neck. Nothing happens until he works his way down to the ankles. When these blink violently, Kauha makes a plan. "Tomorrow I will blind these eyes," he says to himself.
The next day he and ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi are roasting the ǁxaru bulbs. They build a fire and dig a great trench in the coals, a hole "like a porcupine burrow or an antbear burrow." They lay the ǁxaru in the coals but the tops stick out. So Kauha tells his brother-in-law to step on the tops to tamp them down into the hole. "When I rake the coals over them be sure to move your legs!" he says. ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi wonders secretly to himself whether his eyes will get burned. And sure enough Kauha rakes the coals over his eyes! The eyeballs pop and hiss in the fire, singing "Kho-Kho-Kho-Kho-Kho-tsuninini!" Kauha mixes ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi up with the ǁxaru and roasts the lot. As he is being cooked, ǃõǃõtsiǀdasi sings:
	"Tsuninini! Come and eat me and your mouth will disappear!
	Tsuninini! Come and eat me and your mouth will disappear!
	Tsuninini! Come and eat me and your mouth will disappear!"
Kauha's sons Kãǁka and ǃXoma sit and listen to this song and wonder what it is their father is roasting. When they ask him, Kauha pooh-poohs his sons, saying it is their imagination. But they insist, "We're just telling what we heard." Then Kauha rakes the coals away and takes the ǁxaru out of the fire. He pops one into his mouth. Then he takes another one and peels it and eats it. But the next one he tries to eat hits against his mouth and drops to the ground. So does the next one! He tries again and again but the ǁxaru will not go into his mouth. Whatever has sung "tsuninini!" in the fire has already sewn his mouth closed! Sewn and sewn until it has disappeared.
Kauha is pretty surprised. He says to the people, "Sing for me so I can dance and cure myself and get my mouth back." They sing and dance. The women have all turned into birds. Kauha calls out "I want that bird with the long stomach way in the back there to come and dance in front of me!" But only other women come to him, never the one he wants. So he refuses them all and goes on dancing.
While he is dancing, the women steal the rest of the ǁxaru out of his hunting bag, and they eat it all up. They stuff the bag with wet sand to fool him, leaving a few ǁxaru at the mouth of the bag so it will appear full.
Kauha dances and dances, and eventually his mouth comes back. He goes to get more ǁxaru from the bag, and discovers he has been deceived. He calls again for the bird with the long stomach, the ǂtәmsa bird, to dance with him, and refuses all other women. The ǂtәmsa at last comes clapping and singing "ǃKaǂdeǂde, ǃkaǂdeǂde," dancing beautifully, unknowingly to her death. Kauha beats her long stomach that is full of ǁxaru until it becomes even longer, hanging down to the ground.
