NAF000311
The older sister, the python, was pregnant. She and her younger sister, the jackal, went one morning to fetch water. People were drinking at that time from a rock spring, and they went to draw water from it. In the well was a nǂa tree with ripe fruits on it.
The python said to her sister, "Climb up and shake that nǂa branch, so we can have nǂa to eat."
But the jackal refused, "Uh-uh!" she said. "Older sister, climb up yourself and shake down something for us to eat."
So the python herself had to climb the tree. She was pregnant and heavy. When she was up in the tree, she reached for the branch she wanted to shake. But she missed her grasp, and fell into the water. She went down into the spring. She tried to climb out but the sides were too steep. She had to remain in the spring. She gave birth down there.
The python's in-laws looked up and saw the jackal come running from the spring. She ran with a funny gait, wobbling from side to side. The in-laws sat and watched her come into the camp.
"Yo!" they said. "Where's our beautiful daughter-in-law? The jackal has come back alone; we thought our daughter-in-law had gone with her to the spring. What has this jackal done with her older sister?"
When the jackal came up to where they were sitting, the in-laws took a whisk and drew it across her face. That was what they were accustomed to do to her older sister. They would draw a whisk loaded with fat across her face, so that her face would be smooth and shiny.
But the jackal misunderstood: "Fat! Fat! There's fat dripping on my face!" she yelled, and she began to drink it.
The people said "We were right—you are certainly not our daughter-in-law. What have you done with her? What do you think you're doing coming back without her and pretending to be the beautiful python?"
Now all this while the kori bustard, the husband of the python, had been off hunting. When he came home he saw the jackal and said, "Where's my wife?" (The jackal had told the people nothing of how her sister had fallen in the spring. She just kept quiet.) As the jackal was still walking about from fire to fire, the kori bustard went to prepare their sleeping-place. He took porcupine quills and stuck them upright in the sand beneath the jackal's sleeping-skin. When the jackal lay down to sleep, the quills stuck in her ribs. They pierced right through her skin. "Hey!" she yelled. "Get rid of all these stickers!" But the kori bustard pretended not to hear. Finally the jackal was quiet. The porcupine quills killed her. She died, and continued to lie inside the house.
In the morning the kori bustard got up and went off. The jackal's little sister was told by her grandmother, "Go see about your sister. Is she staying inside the house because she's menstruating? What is she doing sleeping so late?"
The little girl ran to see. The jackal had died and the nǂa seeds were protruding from her anus. The little girl saw this and called to her grandmother. "Grannie! Nǂa seeds-seeds have dried-dried in older sister's asshole-asshole!"
The grandmother called back, "Granddaughter! Did you say I should bring a pubic apron to tie on her?" The granddaughter shook her head and called a little louder: "uh-uh! Older sister, for heavens' sake, died in the night and the nǂa has dried in her asshole-asshole!"
"Did you say I should bring a cloth pubic apron and tie it on her?"
Well, they shouted back and forth for awhile. The little girl said again, "Nǂa seeds-seeds have dried-dried in older sister's asshole-asshole!"
Finally the old lady came to see. By this time her granddaughter had broken off the nǂa that was protruding from her sister's anus. The grandmother came over and said, "Oh, is your sister dead?" and then the two of them ate her. They roasted the jackal and ate her.
Meanwhile the kori bustard had gone off to gather all the animals together. He called the giraffe, the elephant, the gemsbok—all the animals. They all walked until they were together at the spring. One by one they stuck their legs Into the spring. But their legs weren't long
enough--they only reached halfway. The eland put in his leg. But it didn't reach. The gemsbok came up and put in his leg. But it didn't reach either. The wildebeest stuck his leg into the spring but failed to reach the bottom.
All the animals—kudus, steenboks, duikers, tortoises, turtles—all gave it a try. Hartebeests, lions, everything—all tried to reach the python, but their legs weren't long enough. "Who will I call to help me?" asked the kori bustard.
"Call the giraffe," said someone.
"Yes, I'll call him." The giraffe came forward and put in his leg. Now the python had given birth down there in the water. She had her child with her and they were together at the bottom of the spring. The giraffe put in his leg and felt about. He said to the python's husband "She's carrying a baby on her back. She has given birth and she's down there with her baby and I can feel both of them."
So the kori bustard sent someone off to the camp to fetch mats to lay on the ground. They brought the mats and laid them all the way between the spring and the camp. Again the giraffe put in his leg. He pulled out the python and her child. The two of them went to sit on a mat. Then her in-laws came to take her home to their camp. They all embraced her and sat down on the ground together joyfully. "Here's our dear daughter-in-law we've been searching for, here she is, most certainly." Then the kori bustard and his wife and child walked slowly and gracefully home along the line of mats.
These are things that were told to me by the old people. They told them and I listened. Would I be lying?
