NAF000312
ǃXõǁəmdima and her younger sister went to the spring. ǃXõǁəmdima fell in and her sister left her there and ran home. When she got back to the camp, the kori bustard looked surprised and said, "My wife ... where's my wife?" He saw that only one girl had returned from the spring. To test whether she was his wife he passed a whisk across her face. Where there should have been the smoothness of his wife's face he felt only hairy jowls, for the younger sister was a jackal. Fat dripped from the whisk and the jackal licked it in glee. 'But if this were really ǃXõǁəmdima,' thought the kori bustard, 'she would have just let the fat slide over her smooth skin as she always does. This must be my wife's younger sister instead.'
Well, the jackal, trying to imitate her sister's walk, managed to glide sedately to their grandmother's fire. While she sat there, the kori bustard was arranging their sleeping place. He spread out skins and then took arrows and stuck them upright in the sand beneath the place where the jackal was going to sleep. Soon she came to join him. She tried to lie down but something stuck in her back. 'What the ... why do I have to sleep in a spot that feels like this? It's all thorny here!' But the kori bustard replied, 'Oh, let's just go to sleep. My spot feels just as bad as yours, and I'm not complaining.' In the night the jackal died from the arrow poison.
The next morning her little sister came to see about her: the sun rose higher and higher and hung in the sky but still she did not come out of her house. 'Grannie!' called the little girl when she found the dead jackal. Nǂa seeds have dried in older sister's asshole-asshole!'
'Did you say I should come and put a beaded pubic apron on her?' 'No! I said nǂa has dried in older sister's asshole-asshole!' Finally the grandmother came to see for herself. She picked up the dead jackal and carried her out to the fire. Then she gathered wood and built up the fire to roast her. She spent the rest of the day eating the roasted jackal. She would eat, then rest awhile, and eat again.
Meanwhile everyone came out of the bush and gathered at the spring. Everyone - the gemsbok, the eland, the giraffe, the zebra. First one, and then the other of them would stick his foreleg into the spring and try to reach ǃXõǁəmdima. The eland came forward and tried, but he couldn't reach her. Then the gemsbok tried, but his leg wasn't long enough. One by one they came forward and stuck their legs into the spring. But no one could reach her. At last the giraffe came up and put in his leg. And it reached right down to where she was.
So the kori bustard called for skin mats to be spread all the way from the spring to the camp. Then the giraffe drew ǃXõǁəmdima out of the spring and sat her down on a skin. She sat there and dried out. Then they brought her back into the camp and sat her down there. That's the story of ǃXõǁəmdima. The jackal fooled her brother-in-law into whisking her face, but he discovered she wasn't his wife at all! ǃXõǁəmdima and the kori bustard were so happy to see each other, and all the people said, 'Yes, here's our niece at last: that other girl was the wrong one all along.'
