NAF000325
Kauha had married two wives, and one of them was a ǂəmsha bird. Her stomach was long, and she sang, "chi, chi, chi, chi, chi, chi," like the hornbill. She was at that time a woman, and her name was ǁushe.
Kauha dug ǁxaru bulbs. He dug ǁxaru with great big bulbs and roasted them. He packed his hunting bag full to the brim with the roasted bulbs. (He was a person who didn't eat with the women - he didn't share food with people.) Then he hung up the hunting bag.
All the people came together and a dance began. While Kauha was dancing, that wife with the long stomach sneaked to the bag of ǁxaru and ate it all up. Then she scooped up sand and packed it into the empty bag. Three ǁxaru bulbs she left on top of the sand. Then she put the bag down and went back to the dance. When Kauha had danced awhile, he went to the hunting bag to get some ǁxaru. He ate the three that were on top, and when he reached for a fourth one, his fingers came out full of sand.
Kauha took up his fire paddle and went to join the dance, danced "dzai, dzai, dzai, ǀẽǀẽǀẽǀẽǀẽ, dzai, dzai, dzai, ǀẽǀẽǀẽ, dzai, dzai, dzai, dzai, dzai, ǀẽǀẽǀẽ," until one of the women broke out of the circle to dance before him. But Kauha said, "ǀẽ! I'm not interested in these people! I want that tall woman standing over there, that tall one. I want that girl." But the woman just stood there and did not come to him.
Then they killed that song, and lifted another. Kauha danced beautifully again. Another woman came to dance before him as he moved around the circle. But he said "ǀẽ! Why are all these women coming to me today? That one over there, I want that one over there to dance before me." But still she didn't listen. The people killed that song and began another, and Kauha continued to dance. One after another, the women would come to dance in front of him and he would refuse.
Finally, the one he wanted left the circle of women and went toward him. They danced together, side by side. Kauha made circles around his wife, and then she made circles around him. Then he danced around her again. All the while he had the fire paddle in his hand and at last he raised it and split open her stomach. The ǂəmsha bird jumped away from him and died. The dance separated from that moment. Kauha crowed after the dispersing people, "hooray for me!"
These are the things that this old ǁaiha did. These things the old people told me, and I heard their stories.
