NAF000303
Long ago, they were all sitting around talking together. They talked and discussed things, and they said, "Today we're going to nǂum ka nǀum [create nǀum]. Then we'll write the name of all the animals on their hides. Today we'll nǂum ka nǀum, and we'll use it to give a different design to each animal. From today people will no longer be people but will have markings and be animals." So they created nǀum. They gave names to all the animals; they told each animal his name. "Today we're going to brand you all so that you will be animals from this day." 
So they built a fire. Everyone crowded around to watch. The zebra came up to see what was going on, and so he was the first to receive his markings. The zebra came up and they drew stripes all over his body with the nǀum. Then they stepped back to look at the zebra's stripes. "This is a pretty pattern here," they said. "See how the nǀum has marked lovely stripes on the zebra. Let's make stripes on ourselves to imitate him so we'll be beautiful too." So they marked themselves with the nǀum to look like the graceful zebra. Yes, long ago people imitated the stripes of the zebra on their own bodies. 
They imitated the markings of the giraffe, too: they were busy making designs on the other animals when the giraffe came by to see what was going on. The giraffe stepped through the crowd and came rocking forward on his long legs. "Sa—a y," murmured the people. Isn't this one pretty?" Then they drew giraffe designs on some of the people, and these were beautiful too. They drew and wrote upon the animals so they all had designs. Some of them walked away with lovely spotted hides. Some were one way and some were another. There was this one, and that one, and that one. 
But one animal did not receive any designs. This was the hyena. "I wonder what kind of ani-mal I'll have to kill and bring to them so they will give me pretty designs too? What does a person kill?" 
"You have to go and kill a steenbok, of course," the people answered. 
So the next morning, the hyena got up and went hunting. He laid his snare well, and he killed a steenbok. When he brought it home to his camp, his wife said, "Now, I want you to cook that steenbok for our children. You are only a hyena and if you go over there where people are doing the markings you'll get into trouble. Those people are just naturally better than you. You're a hyena, a scavenger; hyena is your name and that's that. Even if you go to them they won't treat you like they've treated the other people." 
But the hyena replied, "Don't be so crazy, dirty-face! I'm going to get my branding so I'll have designs like everyone else." 
His wife said, "All right, it looks as if you're going in spite of anything I can say." So the hyena slung the steenbok over his shoulder and went to the branding place. Now his left leg was diseased and rotten. But he carried the steenbok over his shoulder and brought it to the people. When he got there, the children of the camp called out, "Hey! The hyena has snared a steenbok and brought it here." The people reprimanded the children, and said, "Stop that talk; is that any way to behave when a visitor comes? Why do you insult our honored guest by shouting out his name when he arrives?" But all the while they were pinching each other and agreeing together on the sly about what they would do to the poor hyena. 
When the hyena first heard his name called out by the children, he was frightened and stood stock still. "Even the little children know that I'm a hyena." He stood there until some of the people said to the others, "Bring him right up here to the fire: take his steenbok for him and lead him over here so we can give him his markings." So some of them brought him up to the fire, and others began to butcher his steenbok. Of course, they had already made their plans together. They told him that they were going to brand him with beautiful designs. 
Then they took out a long iron and heated it in the fire. Then they said, "Now cover your face and lie down. Put your leg up like this. All right — just lie still now …" So the hyena lay as they told him to. While he was lying there, the people whispered secretly to each other and agreed on what to do to him. Some of them said to the hyena, "All right. When you get your markings you hold your hands tightly over your eyes so you won't see anything. Cover your face and lie still." So he kept on lying there as he was told. "Now lift your leg. We've already done this same thing to the zebra and he's all finished. We laid down stripes on his rump just like the ones we're going to give you." The hyena thanked the people and lay just as they said. He covered his face and lay there. Then they took the iron out of the fire. They thrust it into him right be-low the buttocks. It went "sh – sh - sh!" as it burned him. They screwed it in even further. "Khwa – u – u – u - u! Nǂau!" he defecated all over everyone and ran off. 
Now they had already collected together a bag of old bones. When the hyena jumped up and ran off, they took the old bag and threw it after him. The bag hit him in the head. "Be gone!" they cried. "Go off and gnaw on these old bones. Eat like a hyena should and gnaw on bones. You're a hyena and nothing else." So the hyena ran off with the old bag around his neck. 
At the fire the marking of the animals went on. All the animals came and received beautiful designs. The giraffes came, and they were branded. The people drew giraffe designs on them and drew them until all the giraffes were done. 
Then they took the kudu and stood the kudu by the fire. They branded the kudu with designs and then they said, "Mm, this one will be the female kudu." And they stood her aside. Then they marked the male kudu. They marked him and drew upon his hide, and then they stood his horns upon his head. Next, they branded the little stripes that run down his sides. The little stripes you see there today are the ones they made. And they said, "Mm, this one will be the male kudu." And the male kudu stepped from the fire and went to stand off to one side. 
Then they made the wildebeest. They marked him and marked him and put a little beard on him. They made horns for him. They created the wildebeest, and then they said, "Mm, now this one is the wildebeest." Then the wildebeest got up and went and stood to one side. The people built up the fire and got ready to mark some more animals. The springbok came up to the fire. The people worked on him and drew his colors on him. They drew lovely stripes on his face. Then they said, "Mm, here you are, you're the springbok. You're finished — now go and stand over there." 
Then the gemsbok who had been standing there all this time approached the fire. The people said, "Oh, yes, come right over here and let us brand you." The gemsbok came up to the people, and they gave him his markings. They drew upon his beautiful forelegs. When he was done, the gemsbok left the fire and stood aside. The people said, "Mm, that's the gemsbok over there." Everyone went to look at the gemsbok and many people said, "This animal is certainly beautiful". When the gemsbok was finished, the hartebeest came to the fire. Then they marked the hartebeest's hide with the colors you see on it today. They told the hartebeest that his horns would be shaped the way a hartebeest's horns should be. When he heard them, he walked up to them and had his horns placed on his head. Then he was finished, and he went to stand aside. 
The people said, "Mm, aren't all these animals beautiful?" Every single animal came and was branded that day with the fire. The tsessebes too — they branded the tsessebe's face, just as they had burned the hartebeest's face, they burned the tsessebe's face too. Then they made his rump, and it was black. His forelegs they made black too, and they cut the black sharply at his ankles so that his legs were very beautiful. Then the tsessebe left the fire and went to stand off at one side. He stood up tall and proud. Everyone said, "Yes, we've done him just right."
So they kept on making animals and marking them with fire. The duiker came, and they marked him too. Then he jumped back from the fire and walked away. His horns stood up stiffly on his head: he was a male duiker and he walked proudly away. When he was finished the people said: "Mm, all these animals we've made are fine ones". The female duiker came and they gave her markings too. Then she turned aside from them and walked away. "Yes, these are surely fine animals," they said. Then the little steenbok came up and they branded the steenbok with his red coat. When he left the fire, he paced a few steps, lowered his neck, paced again, and ran away. 
So they branded and marked the animals until all were done. Then the kori bustard came up and said, "Yo! Since you're marking all these animals, so very many of them, won't you do me as well?" 
"Come here," they said. "Come here and we'll give you beautiful colours and markings like the others." The kori bustard came forward. "We'll mark you too." So they made the kori bustard's feathers. They made feathers and stuck them all over him. Then they made his little kori bus-tard head-feather, his topknot, the long, slender feather that hangs over the back of his <pb n="121"/>neck and waggles when he walks. They fastened the topknot on him and as he walked away it bobbed up and down gracefully. "Yo!" said everyone. "Isn't he beautiful?"
Then the python came. The python walked forward and sat down. So they fixed the python and painted her skin and the python came out just fine. As she walked around she undulated smoothly and all her markings shone. The people exclaimed "Yo! This is a fine woman we have before us, so beautiful with all her stripes." The python glided around the fire, arching her back so everyone could see how pretty and striped she was. She undulated back and forth and then went to sit down. 
The people kept on marking the other animals. Pretty soon the ostrich stepped forward. "Yo!" he said. "What's going on here, what's this, what's happening?" "Yo, yourself," answered the people. "What kind of animal is this who has come up now?" they asked themselves. They refused to mark him, saying, "We're not going to brand a person like you. You might just as well go away. Go on, scoot! Just run away and be an ostrich." So the ostrich left them and ran clumsily away. He ran away with the people crying after him, "Be gone! Run away, and may you break your foot on a stick. Go away and become an ostrich and go about doing what ostriches do." That's what the people said. "Go and be an ostrich and do ostrich things, and walk about like an ostrich." So the ostrich jumped away from the fire and ran away and became an ostrich. 
They marked the other animals and branded them until they were done. "Mm, yes," they said. "These pretty ones are the ones who will turn into meat animals. They will be good meat animals." And since then the meat animals have spread out into the land. People go about naming them. When people get together and talk, they say, "Yes, these are the meat animals, and we will kill them and eat them." 
([Interviewer:] Mother, did the jackal ever come to the branding fire? [Teller:] Oh yes, I didn't finish the story—I cut it off in the middle.)
The jackal came too. When the jackal arrived they treated him just like they had treated the hyena. They put a big, long iron in the fire, and when the jackal came they burnt his back with it. They burnt his back, and he jumped up in pain. He ran to lie in the some dung and got it all over his back. "Go away and be the black-backed jackal," said the people. He jumped up and ran off. That's how it happened.
