NEE023343
<pb n="101"/>Once an elephant arrived at Bongso's fields. The elephant ate his bananas. When Bongso saw him he threw his spear at him and it hit him in the flank. The elephant ran away with the spear still sticking in his body. Bongso did not want to lose his spear so he followed after the elephant. He followed the trail of blood that the elephant left behind. He went for several days, walking during the day and sleeping in the jungle at night. In those days there was still a path to the land of the elephants. Their land is called Moöden.<note>The several animals which are said to be "people", are envisaged as looking like human beings when they are "in their own land". Their "lands" are somewhere in the jungle, but they are invisible to the ordinary human eye. Ordinary humans can never see an animal in anything but his animal form. Elephants are people in this sense. Their land is the only one which was named. It is interesting to read this myth in conjunction with "The Elephant who abducted a girl."</note> After three days and nights he arrived at Moöden. He came to a house which he entered. It was not the house of the elephant which he had speared, but that of other elephants. In their own land the elephants take off their elephant "cloaks" and become people. 
The elephants gave Bongso food, and in the evening they sat about chatting. The elephants told Bongso about Ta′, an old man, who was very sick. He just wanted to die, but no one could understand what was the matter with him. The elephants wanted to go to Ta′'s house to see how he was getting on. Bongso also went. He saw his spear in the old man's flank and a deep wound. The elephants could not see the spear, the wound, or the blood. Only Bongso saw it. It is the same way with us when a bas has thrown its spear at us. We cannot see it, we just feel very ill. Bongso recited healing spells. This threw away the poison from the wound. The next day he went and found a long piece of bamboo, the same length as the spear in the elephant's side. In the evening he returned to Ta′'s house bringing the bamboo with him. He entered the house and said his spells. Then he placed the bamboo over the spear and pulled it out keeping it inside the bamboo so that nobody could see it. He took the spear in the bamboo outside, and put it on the ground hidden in the undergrowth. For Bongso, just to look at the wound was sufficient for it to start to heal.<note>Bongso, as putao, is able to see the elephants in their human form. However, he also retains his ability, to see as a human. The elephants do not see the spear, they perceive Ta′'s discomfort as an illness. Bongso is such a powerful putao that all he needs to do in order to heal is look. The eyes are of central significance in this myth.</note> Ta′ quickly recovered. 
When the three days of pantang<note>Whenever a person has undergone a healing ritual, he is subject to various pantang prohibitions for a few days afterwards. These usually involve confinement to particular places and dietary restrictions.</note> following the healing rite were over, Ta′ asked what had happened. The people told him that Bongso had cured him. When he heard that, Ta′ wanted to meet Bongso, and the people went to collect him from the house where he was staying. Bongso told Ta′ how he had thrown a spear at him, and how he had taken it out again. "You are a good man," said Ta′, "I want <pb n="102"/>to give you my two daughters for wives." Bongso accepted and there was a big wedding feast. After a while, however, Bongso became home-sick, and he set out for his own settlement. His two wives accompanied him. On the way they slept in the jungle underneath a very large tree. The wives were frightened that it might break and fall on them. "No, no, it won't fall," said Bongso, but the wives would not listen. They gathered together their belongings, put on their elephant cloaks and returned to their own land. Bongso went to his mother's house. "I have got wives, mother," he told her, "but they have returned home." "Oh," said his mother.
When the two girls came back to their father's house, he was very angry with them for leaving their husband. "But we were frightened that the tree would break," they told him. 
After a while Bongso missed his wives very much and he set out with his mother to go to Moöden. When he arrived, the wives were glad to see him and they gave him an elephant cloak for wearing outside. Whenever we meet an elephant that is not frightened of humans, it is Bongso we have met. 
