NEE023347
<note>Komarr means a fallen tree trunk, or more specifically, one used to walk on in a path.</note>
A long time ago there was only one fruit tree on Earth Seven. It was huge, and many different kinds of fruit grew on it. There was a branch of durian, another of rambutan another of besil, ramai and kamòg. Bujægen Komarr had planted the tree. Every day fruit fell to the ground and people ate them. Then Bujægen Komarr went up to Earth Six, and there was no more fruit<note>Bujægen Komarr was clearly a dew <ref target="g:GEE2143.032">putao</ref></note>, the tree was too tall for anyone to be able to climb it. The branches were too high up. The people waited on the ground for fruit to fall, but none ever did. The daughter of Komarr's aunt [older than parent] wanted very much to eat some ripe durian. Komarr's elder brothers tried to get some for her, but they could not climb the tree. The girl was very beautiful, and they wanted to please her because they wanted to sleep with her. In the evening they conducted a <ref target="g:GEE2143.025">nöpoh</ref>, but they could not send their <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref> out. The next day they went back to the fruit tree. The girl also went. When they looked up they saw Komarr sitting up amongst the branches. He threw down a nice ripe durian to the girl. She took her tobacco pouch<note>By throwing him her tobacco pouch, the girl accepts the offer of marriage indicated by his gift of fruit.</note> and threw it up to him. Komarr caught the tobacco pouch and put it down the front of his loin cloth. He threw lots more fruit down to the girl. He was eating betel nut and he spat the juice down on his brothers. 
When the brothers saw that Komarr had managed to get up into the tree they became very angry. When they saw the girl throw her tobacco pouch up to him they became even more angry, and they decided to hide and wait for him to kill him. They wanted the girl for themselves. Komarr knew what they were planning to do. He flew down and went to the girl's house. The brothers could not see him flying. They waited and waited. Finally they came out of hiding and looked up into the tree. Komarr had gone. "Where is he?" they asked each other, but since he was no longer in the tree they went home, deciding to look for him the following day. 
Komarr and the girl, his aunt's daughter, slept together and became husband and wife. The next day Komarr went fishing. He caught several fish which he tied to his waistband. Then he took his axe and started cutting down trees. Each tree fell in line with the previous one, forming a continuous path of tree trunks. Komarr did not look back. He just cut tree after tree and did not even sleep at night. 
The brothers went looking for Komarr, but they could not see the path of trees that he had cut down. They searched for several days. They went to their mother's house and asked where Komarr had gone. "I do not know," said she, "maybe his wife knows." They went to their aunt's house where Komarr's wife was. "Where is Komarr?" they demanded. "I don't know, he has left," replied <pb n="119"/>she. The brothers then took the girl. They tied a string to her sega [Cane girdle] and tied the other end to a beam in their house. Then they kept watch over her night and day so that she could not run away. They left their own wives who were very ugly. They wanted Komarr's wife to become their wife, but she refused. For one year they kept her thus tied up, and none of them slept all that time. Finally, they became so tired that they fell asleep. When the girl saw that they were fast asleep, she untied the string and ran away. She went to her mother's house and asked to be given some uncooked rice and a saucepan. Then she went over to her mother-in-law's house and asked where Komarr had gone to. "I don't know. He must have gone very far by now," said she.
The girl could see where Komarr had cut down the trees. She followed the path of the trunks. Those close to the settlements had rotted away and she could only follow the rotten bark of the trees. She walked all day following the path made by the trees that had rotted. In the evening she slept on the ground. She did not even make a shelter. She did not eat, only smoked and chewed some betel nut. the next day she went on. This day actual trunks remained of the trees Komarr had felled, but they were completely dried out. She walked all day. In the evening she stopped and went to sleep on top of a tree trunk. She did not eat anything, only chewed betel nut and smoked tobacco. She would not satisfy her hunger until she had met up with her husband. The next day she walked on. That day the trees still had some sap in them. In the evening she slept on top of one them, and again she did not eat. The next day she walked on. There were still some leaves on the trees, but they had dried out. "I am getting closer," she said to herself. In the evening she slept in the branches of a fallen tree. The next day she walked on. That day the leaves on the trunks were still green. "Tomorrow I shall find him," she said to herself. 
Meanwhile the brothers finally woke up. They had slept for five days and five nights without waking. They were so tired after having guarded the girl for such a long time. When they saw that she had gone, they ran out asking people where she had gone. No one knew. They went to her mother and asked her, but she did not know which direction her daughter had taken. "Maybe she has followed after her husband," said she. The brothers ran around trying to find her trail, but their eyes could not discern the path of fallen tree trunks, so they could not follow after her. 
In the morning the girl went on. After a while she saw her husband in the distance. He was shooting his dart at the tree in front of him. As soon as it had fallen, he went on to shoot down the next. He still carried the fish he had caught when he left the settlement. "Wait a little," his wife called out, but Komarr did not stop. He never looked back, his eyes were always fixed on the tree immediately in front of him. The girl called out again. This time Komarr saw her, but he did not stop his work. "You have got new husbands," he called at her angrily. "No, you are my husband," she replied. "No, you were so late in coming, you must have a husband. I don't want you. Go away." As he said this he went on <pb n="120"/>shooting down trees. "No, wait a little," said his wife, "look at this rice and the saucepan. I have not eaten all the time I have been searching for you. I missed you so much I would not eat." When he heard that, Komarr was no longer angry with her. "This is the fish I caught the day I left," he said pointing to the fish at his waist. So they sat down and smoked tobacco. Then they built a house and the wife made a fire and cooked the rice and the fish. When they had eaten they made love. The next day the wife wanted to return home, but Komarr did not want to. He had quarrelled with his brothers and did not want to see them again. But they walked home. It was in fact very close, not far away as the wife had thought. They went to the house of the wife's mother and the house of Komarr's mother. Then they went back to the house they had built in the jungle, which really was very close, not far away at all. In the evening Komarr made <ref target="g:GEE2143.025">nöpoh</ref>. His brothers were sitting together, talking about the girl they had lost, when they heard the drums. They listened. They realized that Komarr had returned. They tried to locate where the sound was coming from, and in the morning they went in the direction of the drumming heard the night before, but they could not see Komarr's house. The following night Komarr made <ref target="g:GEE2143.025">nöpoh</ref> again. The brothers listened and the next morning they climbed a tree to see if they could see the house where he was staying, but their eyes could not find it. They looked everywhere for Komarr, but their eyes were not able to see him. Because they wanted to attack him they were unable to find him, and they become wasps. 
Komarr's <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref> became wind. Before his time there was no wind, but today when there is a strong wind and trees fall over it is Komarr's <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref> who fells them. 
