NEE023296
<pb n="34"/>Porcupines were eating Bongso's tapioca. Every night they arrived and dug up the tubers. Bongso made porcupine spear traps and set them up in his fields. The following morning he went to inspect them. They had been dismantled. Not one had hit a porcupine. He prepared the spear traps and went again the next morning to inspect them. He looked, and saw that they had been dismantled yet again. They had not hit any porcupines, but they were all destroyed and more tapioca had been taken. So Bongso made new traps and placed them close to some large boulders where he thought the porcupines might live. In the morning he went to have a look; but the traps were broken and none had hit a porcupine. "What is going on?" Bongso asked himself as he looked at the pieces of his destroyed traps. The strings were torn, the bamboo spears had fallen over; there was nothing left of the spear traps that he had made so carefully. He repaired them all and went into the jungle hunting monkeys. In the evening he returned home with some monkey meat which he cooked together with rice. Having eaten, Bongso lay down and went to sleep. 
In the night a porcupine woman came to his house. She sat next to him on his sleeping mat. Bongso opened his eyes and looked around him. He could tell that someone was there. When she knew he was awake, the porcupine woman said to Bongso, "I have come on an errand to you, brother-in-law. You are going to become someone's husband. Look, I have brought a headband from my older sister<note>A plaited head band is one of a young girl's gifts to her future husband.</note>. I shall be your sister-in-law from now on because you will be my sister's husband." "Oh, really," said Bongso. "Yes, I shall be your sister-in-law," repeated the porcupine woman. "Who are you then?" asked Bongso. "Oh, you have been making lots of spear traps, have you not?" she remarked, "and every morning they were destroyed, dismantled. This is so; every morning the traps in your fields have been dismantled. It was we who destroyed them. I and my sister and our mother. We came to take your tapioca. Yes, it was we who came and took them." "Ah, you! So, you are porcupine women. I see, you are nothing but porcupine women," said Bongso when he heard this. 
The older sister came to Bongso and they slept together. Bongso slept with the Porcupine woman and she became his wife. After some time a child was born to them. Bongso's mother who lived some distance away went one day to visit her son. When she arrived at his house she heard the noise of a child. She entered the <pb n="35"/>house and said to Bongso, "What is this, Bongso, do you have a child? Do you have a wife?" "Yes, 1 have a child, replied he. "Where did you meet your wife?" she wanted to know. "Oh, she is a jungle woman also, I met her over there," lied Bongso. "Oh," said his mother. She met her daughter-in-law, and she stayed at Bongso's house for a while. After some time another child was born, and then Bongso's mother returned to her husband. 
After some time had passed, after more than one year, Bongso's mother said to her husband, "I am going to return to my grand-children." She missed not being with them. So she went. Bongso's father said to himself. "Ah, I think that I will go to Bongso's settlement as well. I can cultivate my tapioca there, I can go hunting and shoot monkeys as well from there as from here." So he went as well. 
Time passed and the two children became quite big. One day they went out into the jungle and dug up some yinröz fruit which they cooked in their grandmother's saucepan. But the yinröz fruit ruined the saucepan. When the grandmother saw what had happened, she became very angry. "Oh my saucepan, it is ruined," she exclaimed, "Oh you porcupine children you! Wanting to eat yinröz fruit, just like porcupines, and now you have ruined my saucepan. I am very unhappy." The children did not like to hear their grandmother being angry with them, and when their mother returned home in the evening they said to her that they wanted to help her fetch some firewood in order to cook the evening meal. There was monkey meat for dinner. "Well, you are certainly energetic," said the mother, "but there is lots of firewood already." "No, no, mother, let us go and fetch some more," they insisted. So their mother agreed, and off they went. "Oh, mother," they said when they were outside the house. "What?" "Oh, grandmother called us porcupine children when we ruined her saucepan with yinröz fruit." When their mother heard this she would not continue to live with her mother-in-law. "We will go back home," she told her children. They went to the house in the boulders. "Open the door, mother, we are coming home," she called out to her porcupine mother. The door was opened and they entered. 
In the evening Bongso returned to the settlement. He listened for the voices of his children, but could hear nothing. Dusk was falling and Bongso kept listening for his family. Finally he said to his mother. "What have you done to the children, mother." "l have done nothing," replied she, "they ruined my saucepan by cooking yinrogen and yinröz<note>These two fruits are not eaten by humans, but are much favoured by porcupines.</note> fruit in it, and I called them porcupine children." "What!" exclaimed Bongso, "you knew that my wife was a porcupine woman. Now you have offended her." "No, I did not mean to offend," she replied. Bongso ran after his wife and came to the house in the boulders. He knew that she would no longer wish to live in his house, but would want to live in the house in the boulder. "Hey you, open the door, you are coming home," he said to his wife. "No, we have returned to being porcupines," she replied, "we are wearing our <pb n="36"/>porcupine "cloaks" from now on: Why don't you come to live together with us?" she said to Bongso. She opened the door and Bongso entered. He put on a porcupine cloak, and they all became true porcupines. They were no longer able to wear human "cloaks".<note>This legend is rendered in Chewong in the Appendix.</note> 
