NEE023345
<pb n="111"/>Once there was a grandmother who had a swelling in the breast. It rotted away and finally it fell off.<note>Another version says that the breast was cut off by a falling tree.</note> She said to her husband, "Go and cut off a breast of one of our grand-daughters so that I can put it where my own fell off. He went to his grand-daughters' house and met the elder one. "There are lots of ripe fruit at a tree in the jungle," he said "let us go and pick them." They went to the tree and the grandfather climbed up to cut the fruit while the girl waited on the ground underneath. When he had climbed high up, he let his axe fall. It missed the girl. The grandfather climbed down again to get it "My axe slipped," he said and went up once more. When he was high up he let the axe drop, and this time it hit the girl on the head and she was killed. The grandfather climbed down, cut off one of her breasts, wrapped it in some leaves and took it home with him and put it inside the house. The girls' dog - which was really a tiger<note>This dog really belonged to the younger sister, Bongso. By saying that it was a tiger, the story is telling the audience that it belongs to a great shaman, and that it is really his or her spirit-guide. Only the very greatest shamans have tigers as their familiars.</note> - saw what was happening and he followed the grandfather, and when the grandfather had gone out he took the breast and brought it to the younger sister. "Why, it is my elder sister's breast," said she, and she followed the dog to her sister's corpse. First she healed the sore, then she blew magical smoke (òz taba) on her head and feet and the girl came alive. "Oh dear, I have been sleeping in the middle of the day," said the younger sister when she woke up. Her sister told her what had happened. 
Meanwhile the grandfather came home and realized that the breast was missing. He returned to the corpse and saw that the girl had been brought back to life. The younger girl saw his shadow. "There is grandfather," she said, and the two girls ran off. Grandfather followed "Where are you, grand-daughters?" he shouted. "Over here granddad," replied the younger sister. They had hidden behind some trees. The grandfather followed the sound of their voices, but by the time he reached the spot, the girls had gone much further. This went on for some time until they had arrived deep inside the jungle. Then the younger sister called out, "There is going to be a big storm grandfather, we will run home." A terrible storm did in fact start - brought about by the younger sister - and a tree fell on the grandfather and he died. 
"We'll walk on and not return home," said the younger sister to the elder. They took some bananas and some sugarcane with them and started walking. They walked and walked, and in the evening they arrived at their own house. It had been moved there by the younger girl's magic. "This is our home for tonight," said she and the two girls entered. Their own rice was in the house and they cooked it with the bananas. "I wish we had some corn on the cob," said the elder sister, so the younger turned the sugar-cane into corn on the cob and they ate this <pb n="112"/>as well. When they had finished eating they went to sleep. In the morning they ate again and the elder sister wanted to bring the rest of the food with them, but the younger said that they would walk without carrying anything. "We'll leave it here, it is much easier to walk without it," she said and they set off. On the way their dog, which was really a tiger, caught a pig. In the evening they arrived at their own house which had preceded them. "This is our home for tonight," said the younger girl. They entered and cooked the pig. The younger sister divided the meat into three equal parts. "This is your meat, this is mine, and this is the dog's," she said. They ate and then went to sleep. The next morning they ate again and the older sister wanted to bring the rest of the meat with them. "No, we'll walk without anything to carry," said her sister and they set off. After a while the older girl became very tired. She was still not strong after the incident with the grandfather. "I wish we had not thrown away the, bananas yesterday," she complained. In the evening they arrived at their own house again. "This is home for tonight," said the younger sister and they entered the house. Inside they found the rest of the pork from the day before, the rest of the rice, and the bananas. The younger girl prepared a meal and when it was completed she divided it all into three equal parts. "This is your meat and your rice and your bananas," she said to her sister, giving her one share, "this is mine," she said taking another share for herself, "and this is the dog's," she concluded giving him the last share. After they had finished eating they went to sleep. The next morning they ate again, and the older sister wanted to bring the rest of the food with them, but her sister said it was much easier to walk if they did not have to carry anything, so they set off. In the evening they arrived yet again at their own house where the rest of the meat and rice were still inside it. 
This went on for several days and nights until one night the younger girl had a dream in which she visited the house of friends and relations. The following morning she said, "Today we carry our things." By this time there was only a tiny bit of food left, so the younger girl carried this together with their sarongs and their tobacco pouches. The older girl was still not strong. After they had walked for a while, the younger girl pointed to a hill and said "That is a very beautiful hill, we'll have a rest there and eat our food." As they approached they came to a very large and wide path, at the end of which they could see a large house. The younger girl walked across the path with no problem but the older tried three times unsuccessfully. "Jump it," her sister told her. She did but she fell because it was very slippery. They walked up to the house and they entered. Inside was a very large macaque asleep. He was lying on his back with his arms outstretched. The older sister was very frightened because this macaque had killed and eaten all the people in the nearby settlement.<note>The Chewong know that macaques do not eat people. This particular macaque was not a "true" macaque, it was a macaque yinlugen</note> The younger sister had seen this in her dream the night before, and told her sister about it. She was not frightened, <pb n="113"/>however. She went up to shake the macaque, but he was fast asleep. She then cooked the rest of their rice and they ate it with the remaining pork, leaving just a little rice. Then they chewed betel nut. The younger girl spat the red betel nut juice on the macaque's penis, and this is how macaques came to have such bright red penises. She then chewed some red chillies and took the juice and rubbed it on his penis, his eyes, his mouth and stomach. Then she placed plates standing on their side all along his body, face and stomach. Having completed this she told her sister "You will become a cockroach and will sit up on the roofbeam. I'll become a frog and will sit underneath the trough<note>The trough referred to is that which the Chewong use for pounding hill-rice.</note> on the ground." The sister became a cockroach and she went up on the roofbeams. The dog became a treestump next to the upturned trough, and the younger sister became a frog and she went underneath the trough. 
The macaque woke up. He had a terrible pain in his penis, in his eyes and mouth and he ran to the river and jumped in. The water made the stinging even worse and he rushed up and down until the pain subsided. Then he went home and ate the rest of the girls' rice, after which he descended to the ground. He sat himself on the upturned trough hanging his loincloth over the tree stump - which was really the head of the dog-tiger. The girl knocked at the "roof"' of the upside-down trough. The macaque lifted the trough and looked underneath, but he could see nothing. The girl had made herself invisible. So he settled back on the trough and the girl knocked again. "What is this?" he said to himself and peeped underneath the trough, but he could see nothing and sat back. The girl knocked yet again, but this time the macaque took his loincloth from the tree stump and covered his lap and the sides of the trough with it. Then he lifted the trough on one side, put it down again and waited. After a little while he saw something move in his lap underneath the loincloth. He looked and it moved again. He picked up a piece of wood and, muttering to himself, "I've got you this time," he hit it as hard as he could. But what he had seen move was his own penis and so he leaped with pain. The "tree stump" returned to being a tiger and he attacked the macaque while he was dancing around with pain. The macaque died. the younger sister entered the house. The older one came down from her beam and the two sisters looked at the corpse of the macaque. They did not want to eat it. That would be dirty since the macaque had eaten people. 
It began to rain very heavily.<note>It is possible that the girls behaviour towards the macaque constituted talaiden, resulting in these storms. However, since they survived, one must assume that there were mitigating circumstances. I failed to question the storyteller on this point.</note> The water covered the area underneath the house. Then it reached the floor level, and the younger sister turned herself and her sister into cockroaches and they went up to sit on the roofbeam and wait for the rain to stop. Finally it did so, after water had risen almost as high as the roof beams. When the water flowed away it carried with it the macaque corpse. The two sisters climbed down and the younger turned them both back into people. <pb n="114"/>They tidied up the house and the ground outside. There were lots of fish inside the house which had been brought by the flooding rivers and these they prepared and ate. Then they went to sleep. In the night the younger girl dreamt that she saw Bongso [male] who was on his way towards the house. The following morning the younger girl made lots of darts. When she had a large pile, she stopped; and went in search of pandanus leaves. She began to prepare a mat.<note>A new mat, large enough to accommodate two people is another object given by a girl to her husband-to-be</note> In the night she dreamt that Bongso had come much closer. The next morning she asked her sister, "Do you hear anything? I think I can hear people approaching." She knew that Bongso was on his way, but that it was too soon to expect him. The sister listened. "No," she said, "I can't hear anything." Later in the day the younger sister asked again if her sister could hear anything, and this time there was the bark of a dog in the distance. This was Bongso's dog which was running ahead. Bongso himself was still some distance away. The younger girl then went down and into the jungle. She came across a porcupine which she hit and killed, but she left it on the path and went home. Meanwhile Bongso was getting closer. He could not find his dog. It had entered the girls' house. As Bongso was approaching, all the time looking for his dog, he came across the porcupine and he attacked it. After he had hit it several times he realized it was already dead. He heard his dog barking in the distance, so, picking up the porcupine he followed the barking and reached the girls' house. "Come here, enter the house," the younger sister called out. But Bongso was shy and would not enter their house. "It is all right, our husband is here," the younger girl informed him, so Bongso entered. He saw all the darts and thought they belonged to the husband, and he thought that it was the husband who had killed the porcupine. He gave this to the girls and asked where their husband was. "Oh, he has just gone out," replied the younger. They gave him tobacco and betel nut. After he had finished these Bongso said he must return home. He was very shy being in the company of the two girls. "Oh dear," said the younger "Look, it is starting to rain and there is a wind coming up. You had better spend the night here," she said to Bongso.<note>The following part of the legend is virtually identical to the last part of "The jilaegen woman.</note> 
Bongso went to sleep in one of the houses made empty after the macaque had eaten all the inhabitants of the settlement. He went to sleep, but after a short while he cried out "There is a snake in here." "Oh dear," said the younger sister. "Well I can't sleep here," said Bongso. "Try the house over there," said the girl and Bongso moved. After a short while he cried out that the house was wet from the rain "Where shall I go?" he asked. "Try the house over there," replied the girl and Bongso moved. He went to sleep, but after a little cried out "Oh there are lots of scorpions in here. What shall I do?" "Try the house over there," said the girl. Bongso moved yet again and settled down to sleep when he was attacked by a swarm of mosquitoes. "There are mosquitoes in here, where can I go?" "Try the <pb n="115"/>house over on the other side," the girl told him. The two sisters were busy cooking the porcupine; they had not settled down to sleep yet. Bongso moved and went to sleep. No sooner had he fallen asleep that he was covered by cockroaches. "This house is full of cockroaches" he cried out, and the girl told him to try yet another house. He went over and tried to go to sleep, but discovered poisonous centipedes. "There are centipedes in here," he called out, "Where shall I go now?" "There are no other houses," said the younger sister, "you must come and sleep in our house." Bongso went over to their house, but he sat by the entrance and was very shy. The girls had finished cooking the porcupine, and all three ate it. When they had eaten the two sisters went and sat next to Bongso, one on either side of him, and they started to embrace and fondle him. "No, no, you must not, your husband will be very angry," he protested, but the girl said that they had no husband. "What about all the darts and the dead porcupine?" Bongso wanted to know. "No, truly we have no husband," the girls assured him, and the younger sister told him how they had killed the macaque which had eaten all the people in the settlement. She then told him that she had made the rain and the storm in order to prevent him leaving and that later she and her sister had turned themselves into the snake, the scorpions, the mosquitoes, the cockroaches, and the centipedes because she wanted him to come and sleep in their house. So Bongso slept with the two girls who became his wives. 
