NEE020446
<pb n="2"/>A long, long time ago there were no people on Earth Seven. Allah Ta′Allah<note>Allah Ta′Allah is from the Arabic meaning God Most High. The term is also used by the Muslim Malays.</note> [sometimes referred to as Tohan<note>Tohan is from the Malay Tuhan which is the common name for God.</note>] told his Nabi<note>Nabi is the Malay word for prophet, usually referring to Mohammad when it is spelt with capital "n". These three names are clearly borrowed form the Muslim Malays, and are a means by which the Chewong show the outside world that they, contrary to popular Malay belief, also have a religion and tradition (adal). The Chewong are always insistent that their Tohan etc. are not the same as that of the Malays. It is impossible to estimate when these names were introduced into the Chewong cosmology</note> to make people out of earth. The Nabi did not know what people were supposed to look like, so he first made the shape of an elephant. When Allah Ta′Allah saw it he said, "That is not people (beri) that is an elephant; make them so they look like us. So the Nabi tried again and this time he made the shape of a human being. He made two shapes, one man and one woman, but they were not alive. So he went to Allah Ta′Allah and told him that the figures had no breath (njug). Allah Ta′Allah blew into his clenched fist and passed the breath into Nabi's hands. He had one breath in each hand. He started back to the two earth figures, but on the way he wanted to see what breath looked like, so he opened both fists. He could see nothing, however, and breath disappeared. Nabi returned to Allah Ta′Allah who gave him two new breaths<note>See also "How Bas were Made" in Part III.</note>. He went to the figures without looking at the breath, and he placed his fist on the fontanelle of each figure in turn and blew through it. Then he hit their big toes. The two figures stood up. They were alive. They were the first human couple. They did not know what to do in order to have children. The Nabi did not know either. He tried putting a piece of firewood up the anus of the woman, but that was no good. The couple had sexual intercourse, but they did not know what this would lead to. They were stupid. The woman became pregnant, but they did not know, and when she began to have terrible stomach pains they did not understand that she was about to give birth. They did not know what to do, so the man cut open the woman's stomach and took out the child inside. The child lived, but the woman died. This is how the early people delivered their babies. There were no adult women in those days. When their first child was born their husbands cut open their stomachs and the women died. The husband did not know what to do with the child, but his wife's ghost (yinlugen) came to him in a dream and told him to let the child suck at his elbow. The man did this, and milk appeared which the child drank. This was how all babies were kept alive after their mothers had died.
