NEE023340
<pb n="98"/>Once upon a time there was an elephant woman who asked an ordinary human woman for her baby daughter. The woman gave the girl to the elephant, but when the elephant carried the baby away the baby cried and cried. The mother wanted her baby back, but the elephant woman would not return her. She carried the baby to the mountains where she lived. Here she gave her sweet things to eat as well as rice and meat. The elephant woman became the girl's mother. The years went by and the baby grew into a girl. Her real mother missed her very much. 
One day the real mother's nephews came to visit her. "Why are you so sad, auntie?" they wanted to know. "I miss my daughter," replied the aunt. She told the nephews how the elephant had taken the girl and said, "If you bring her back, I will give her to you as a wife." The nephews said that they would go and look for her. 
The next day the nephews sharpened their spears. Their aunt gave them a large meal and they set off towards the mountain where the elephants lived. When they got close to the mountain they climbed a tanòi tree and from the top they could see the girl at a distance. A bird had seen the boys getting ready and had warned the elephant mother that they were on their way to take the girl away. The girl was very beautiful. She had white skin and long hair.<note>The Chewong do not have notions of feminine beauty. To have one's face and torso decorated in printed patterns "just like the leaf people" is said to be beautiful. Whereas long straight hair is said to be attractive (their own tends to be curly or wavy, and does not grow very long), I rarely came across statements that pale skin is more attractive than dark. Among the Malays pale skin is regarded as an asset.</note> The boys shouted to her, "Come here, come here, your mother is missing you!" But she was frightened because the elephant was there and she dared not leave. The boys waited in the tree all day, but towards evening they became very hungry so they climbed down. They cut a rante tree with their spears and smeared the red sap from it onto the spear heads. Then they went back to their aunt's house and told her that there were many elephants watching over the girl and that they had only managed to kill a few. They showed the aunt their spears and said the sap from the rante tree was the blood of the elephants they had killed. The aunt was very pleased and she gave her nephews a large meal of rice and after they had eaten she gave them tobacco and betel nuts. When they had eaten and smoked they went to sleep.
The next day they sharpened their spears, and after having been given a meal by their aunt they set off again. When they arrived at the tanòi tree they climbed it. The bird had warned the elephants that they were coming and they could see that there were lots of elephants guarding the girl. The elephants sat in a circle around her. The boys shouted to the girl, "Come here, come here, your mother is missing you!" But the girl was frightened of the elephants and dared not move. The boys <pb n="99"/>waited in the tree all day, but towards evening they became very hungry so they climbed down and cut the rante tree and dipped their spears in the red sap as they had done the previous evening, and set off back to the aunt's house. When they arrived, they told the aunt that there were still twenty elephants left, but that they would go back the next day to kill some more. The aunt was very happy and she gave them a large meal of rice and afterwards she gave them tobacco and betel nut. Then they all went to sleep. 
The same thing happened the following day when the boys said there were still twelve elephants left. And the next day when they told their aunt that there were eight elephants left. The day after they said there were four or five elephants still alive. The day after that they said that they did not want to kill any elephants that day. They wanted to go hunting instead. They caught fish, river turtle and tortoise. 
The youngest brother, Bongso, had not gone with his brothers to the aunt's house. He was still at home in his own swidden. He was not good-looking. He was ugly. He was also very dirty because he always slept close to the fireplace. On the day that his older brothers went hunting Bongso went to his aunt's house. She did not know that he had arrived. Bongso did not enter the house. He took a piece of wood and blew "magical" smoke (òz taba) smoke on to it. In the evening he went towards the elephant woman's house. On the way he met the bird which had warned the elephants before, and he hit it with the piece of wood, which turned into a knife. The bird fell dead to the ground. Then Bongso went to the house. All the elephants were fast asleep lying in a circle around the girl. Bongso killed all the elephants with his magical knife. The girl told him how his brothers had come every day to the tanòi tree and shouted at her "Come here, come here!" and how they had pretended that the sap from the rante tree was blood. the girl looked at Bongso and saw that he was ugly, but she made a headband<note>This is a symbol of marriage. A girl always makes a headband for her husband-to-be which he wears during the wedding ceremony. In the old days every adult man wore a headband all the time. Today shamans wear them during a nöpoh</note> for him and they slept together. In the morning they went to the aunt's house, but when they reached the swidden, Bongso told the girl [who was now his wife] to climb a banana palm and wait there. He went alone to the aunt's house, pretending he had just arrived from his own house, and told her, "Aunt go and check the banana palm over there, the bananas are ripe." "No, I have been to look at them today," replied the aunt. "Go, they are ripe," insisted Bongso. So the aunt went and when she arrived at the palm she looked up. The girl threw down a banana and the woman saw her daughter. The girl climbed down and told her mother everything that had happened. 
The same evening the older brothers arrived back from their hunting expedition. When they saw the girl they said that they had finished off the elephants and that the girl must have walked home on her own. They had <pb n="100"/>brought with them meat and fish from the hunt and told the aunt that the wedding would be the following day. 
The next morning the brothers put on their best clothes. They pulled in their waists to make them slim. Then they went over to the aunt's house to claim the girl in marriage. "It was not you who killed the elephants, it was Bongso," said the aunt. They were angry when they realized that they had been found out. "But Bongso is so ugly," they said. Bongso meanwhile had gone to wash in the river. He became very handsome. He went over to his aunt's house where there was a wedding party for Bongso and the girl. The older brothers were very angry, and they turned into mosquitoes. 
