NEE023313
<pb n="68"/>Once there was a child who wanted the moon to play with. The father cut a long bamboo and dug it into the ground. Then he started to climb. He climbed for three months, but was still a long way away from the moon. He climbed for six, seven months, but was still far away from the sky. It is very far away, our sky. After one year he finally reached the sky. He waited for the evening. It became dark and a full moon arrived. She saw the man. "What do you want?" she asked him. "Oh, I want you," said the man, "my child wants you for a pet." "Disrespect!" (tolah)<note>Tolah is the rule which forbids showing disrespect to affines and to non-meat foodstuffs. It is also tolah to quarrel with one's spouse. Disrespect may mean calling someone by their true name, as opposed to their nick-name, to laugh in their presence, and in general to fail to behave with restraint and respect. Here the moon is included among those towards whom respect is due. (See also "The Mouse-Deer" in Part IV).</note> exclaimed the moon and she kicked at the bamboo stalk so that it and the man fell to the ground. He fell down in a land far away. As he fell on soil which had recently been turned [the people who lived there had just been digging <plant latin="manihot utilissima">tapioca</plant>], he did not get killed. The people were "original people" (<ref target="g:GEE2143.009">bi asal</ref>). They looked at him. "What has happened?" they enquired. "Oh, I fell from the sky. My child wanted the moon for a pet and the moon kicked me," he said. The people gave him meat and <plant latin="manihot utilissima">tapioca</plant> to eat, and when he had finished eating they said, "So, you have a child?" "Yes, I have children and I have a wife," he replied and he wanted to start for home. He would follow the bamboo. The people tied a long string to one of his ankles so that he could return to them should he want to. They also gave him a basket full of meat. When he had finished all the meat he became very hungry and so he had to return to the people by following the string tied to his ankle. "What do you want?" they asked him when they saw him. "My meat is all eaten," he said. "What have you been eating since?" they wanted to know. "I have been licking at my knife," he replied. They gave him more meat and he set off again. However, he had become a keoi [bas that eat peoples' bodies]. If he had not licked at his knife he would not have become a keoi. As he came close to his own settlement his meat again was finished, so he was hungry. When he reached his own house, his wife was cooking plantains. He wanted to put a plantain inside his wife's vagina and eat it from there. "No, that is dirty," (<ref target="g:GEE2143.019">kama</ref>) objected his wife angrily. He really wanted to eat his wife's vulva. His eyes had become different. When he looked at human beings he saw them only as potential food.
They went to sleep and in the morning he told his wife that he wanted to go into the jungle to dig for takkad [an edible tuber] and that he wanted his oldest child to accompany him. The two set off and when they reached a spot where he knew there was takkad, he stopped and told his daughter to make a big fire so that they could cook the takkad after he had dug it up. "Bring lots of water also," he told her, "l shall be very thirsty when I have finished digging." She did as he told her and <pb n="69"/>he went looking for takkad. When he had collected enough, he cooked it and gave his daughter to eat. "Eat well, I want to eat lots of stomach content later," he told her. "What did you say Father?" she asked. "No, no, I said that you must eat fast and well. I want to go home to fondle your mother," he quickly corrected himself. When she had finished eating, he looked over her shoulder into the distance behind her. "What are you looking at, Father?" she asked. "l think there are some people coming," he replied. As she turned round to have a look, he pushed her over and stabbed her with the digging stick used for digging out the takkad."Ouch, ouch, ouch, Father," she cried, but she soon died and he drank all her blood. He took off her sega,<note>This is the cane girdle worn by Chewong women around the waist. It is twined six to eight times and tied. It is decorated with designs said to have protective properties.</note>, bracelets, and necklace and hung them on a branch a little way off. Then he cut her open and ate the content of her stomach and her intestines. The flesh he cut into small pieces and boiled in bamboo.<note>Before the recent advent of metal saucepans, the Chewong used bamboo for all cooking purposes, as well for carrying water.</note> When he had finished eating he plaited riding<note>Riding are plaited loops of leaves made for nopöh. They are worn on the shaman's head-band and are also fixed to the <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref> string which is suspended across the house. The "leaf people" sit in the riding when they arrive. Riding are one of the objects of exchange that a shaman may offer in return for an abducted human <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref>. The Chewong are always on the look-out for the appropriate leaf when walking in the jungle, and they while away the time plaiting riding.</note> and hung them on branches nearby. Towards evening he wrapped the rest of the meat in leaves and put it in his backbasket. He also wrapped the rest of the takkad separately, put them in his basket as well, and set off for home. 
"Where is the child?" asked his wife when he came home alone. "We met grandmother in the forest and the girl went home with her to spend a few days in her settlement," he lied. He then gave her the wrapped takkad telling her to eat it all saying that he had already eaten a lot and was full. "This," he said indicating the wrapped meat, "is some herbal roots which I am going to take for my toothache." After the wife had eaten they went to bed, and as soon as the wife was fast asleep he got up and ate the rest of his daughter's flesh. 
The next morning he told his wife that he wanted to go and dig for more takkad. He took with him another of his children. When they reached the spot where he had eaten his daughter the day before, he pointed to the riding and told the child, "These your grandmother and aunt made yesterday." They said they might return today, so you had better go and make a big fire and collect a lot of water so that we can give them cooked takkad to eat and water to drink when they arrive." She did as he told her and he brought a lot of takkad which he gave her to cook. After a while she said, "The takkad is cooked, Father. When is Grandmother coming?" He looked behind her. "What are you looking at, Father. Is that Grandmother coming?" She turned round to have a look. He pushed her over and stabbed her with the digging stick. He drank the blood Then he took her sega, her bracelets and necklace and hung them up with thoose of the other daughter. <pb n="70"/>He cut her up and ate the stomach and the intestines raw. The rest of the body he cooked in bamboo. Then he plaited riding, as he had the previous day, and threw away the old ones which were beginning to wither, and hung the newly made ones up instead. He wrapped the meat and the takkad as he had the day before and set off for home. "Where is the child?" asked his wife when she saw him returning without her. "Oh, we met aunt in the forest and the girl wanted to go back with her as her sister did," he lied. He gave her the takkad saying that his parcel contained medicine for toothache, and after the wife had gone to sleep he ate the rest of his daughter. 
In the following days he killed all his remaining children, each night telling his wife that they had gone after their brothers and sisters to the grandmother's settlement. When he came home after the seventh and last child had been consumed, his wife gave birth in the night. He took the afterbirth with the navel string attached and told his wife that he would wrap it in a mat and leave it out in a tree [as is the practice], but instead he took it outside and ate it all. Then he went to the area underneath the house and licked all the blood which had fallen down through the split bamboo floor.<note>See "How humans were taught how to behave" in Part I. This is the correct way to dispose of the afterbirth. The blood which falls on the ground during the birth must be covered with ashes immediately to prevent the Original Earth Ghost from licking it.</note> The next day the wife said she wanted to go her mother's and see all her children. Her husband pretended to want to do the same. "You go on ahead," he told her. "No, I don't know the way," she objected. "Yes you do, just follow the path over there," he insisted. So she started off. When she reached the spot where he had killed and eaten all their children, she discovered the sega, bracelets and necklaces of her daughters and she knew that he had eaten them. She ran and hid in a tree, but in her hurry she forgot the baby. When the husband arrived and saw the baby abandoned he realized that his wife had guessed the truth. He took the baby, put it on a skewer and roasted it in the fire. After having eaten it he went looking for his wife. He discovered her sitting up in a tree. "Ah, I'll go and fetch my blowpipe," he said to himself. He brought the blow-pipe and shot at his wife, but did not hit her. Then he made a large fire at the base of the tree in order to smoke her out. He climbed up to get her, but when he was very near she threw her knife at him and he lost his balance and fell into the fire where he was burned to death. The wife called out, "Become flying-lemur! You who eat humans." He became a flying-lemur ghost. 
