NEE023286
<pb n="3"/>In the old, old days people did not know about maro<note>Maro and pantang (see below) are both rules governing Chewong behaviour. Maro specifies that one must always share one's food and offer visitors to eat. Pantang rules are about specified behaviour at times of life crises. (See also part IV).</note> [the rule that specifies that one may not eat alone, but always be generous and share one's food]. One day Bujægen<note>Bujægen is derived from the Malay bujang which means single, unmarried. The Chewong use it to indicate a young man, usually, but not necessarily, a bachelor. Yed is a species of lizard.</note> Yed went hunting. He shot a binturong.<note>The binturong (Arctictis) is a member of the Malayan civet family. It is primarily arboreal and it is omnivorous (Medway 1978).</note> He prepared it and cooked it in the jungle on his own. In those days people lived by the maxim "whatever I catch I eat, whatever you catch you eat." That was how it was in the old days. While Bujægen Yed was eating his catch of the day, Yinlugen<note>Yinlugen is the aspect of a person that continues to live in the afterworld; also a class of (usually) harmful superhuman beings. Bud means a fallen treetrunk.</note> Bud came by. He is an original ghost who was around before the first humans. Bud asked Yed what he was doing. "I am eating my binturong," replied Yed. "If you eat alone and don't share, you maro. You must always share your food with others. Human beings must never eat alone," Bud told him. When he heard this, Yed took his binturong meat and went home. He gave the meat to his wife who was pregnant. She ate and was no longer hungry. She was about to give birth. She had bad pains in her stomach. Yed took out his knife and prepared to cut open her stomach. Yinlugen Bud who had followed Yed back to his house asked him what he was doing. "l am going to cut open my wife's stomach so that the child can get out," said Yed. "No, no," said Bud "Don't do that. There is an opening." He showed Yed how to press on the stomach of the pregnant woman, and when the baby came out, Bud showed Yed how to cut the navel string with a piece of bamboo and tie it with a piece of rattan. Then he showed him how to wrap the afterbirth in leaves and place it in a tree, and how to cover the blood with ashes. Yed then started to feed the child from his elbow, which was how the men used to feed their babies after their wives had died from having their stomach cut open. "What are you doing?" asked Bud, "there is milk in the mother's breasts." Then Bud taught the birth spells, and the various leaves to be used for medicines after the birth. 
He showed him which species of tree fibres to boil and give the mother to drink, and which leaves to warm up and put on her stomach. He also told him all the pantang rules connected with child birth: the woman sleeps next to the fire, she cannot go out except to relieve herself, nor can she eat meat until all bleeding has ceased. Having taught Yed all practices connected with child birth, Yinlugen Bud returned to his own lands. From then on women did not die in child birth, and people did not eat alone any more, but always brought back their game and shared it with everybody. 
