NEE023291
Once there was a pandanus plant woman. She very much wanted a baby, but no man would sleep with her for her vagina was full of thorns; her vagina teeth. So she slept with her legs wide open in order for the wind to enter her vagina. After about one year she became pregnant and in due course she gave birth to a girl. The pandanus woman wanted more children. Many men came to have sexual intercourse with her, but the sharp thorns in the vagina cut off their penises and they died. 
After a while Bongso went to have a look at the pandanus woman. All his elder brothers had died from having slept with her and Bongso was curious. He saw all the thorns and made himself into a tiny being so that he could enter the woman's stomach without being torn to shreds by the thorns. He wanted to enter her, but not to die in the process. The woman thought she was pregnant when Bongso was inside her. He grew inside her stomach until the day came when she started her labour pains. The woman told her daughter by the wind, "Take great care at this birth of your younger sibling. It is a boy." Bongso was born and the pandanus-leaf woman thought that he was a real baby. She would chew the <plant latin="manihot utilissima">tapioca</plant> herself before putting it inside his mouth, as one does to real babies, but he spat it out. He was no baby, but a man who had made himself very small and entered her stomach. So the woman gave him proper rice and <plant latin="manihot utilissima">tapioca</plant> and this he ate. He grew very fast. After seven days he could walk. When he was a little bigger the mother told her "wind daughter" to take him with her into the jungle to search for edible roots. She gave them a knife each, but Bongso hid his knife and when he returned home he told the pandanus woman that he had lost it. "Never mind," said she, "I have lots of knives."<note>What is implied here is that the woman makes knives from the thorns of the pandanus plant. Knives are highly valued by the Chewong.</note> The next day they went into the jungle again, and when they had finished digging, Bongso hid his knife on the ground telling his mother that he had lost it. "Oh never mind, there is no shortage of knives," she replied. The same thing happened each time Bongs went into the jungle, but the woman did not mind losing all the knives. Bongso kept the knives for use later.
Time passed and Bongso grew up. When his sister was quite big and she had grown breasts,<note>Among the Chewong, a girl is regarded as ready for marriage when her breasts "have fallen."</note> Bongso said to her one day, "I am not really your brother, I made myself very small in order to enter your mother's stomach. I knew how many men had died from having their penises cut off while having intercourse with her. All my elder brothers were also killed in this way. Are you very fond of your mother?" he asked her. "No," said she. "No, I am not very fond of her." "Truly?" he insisted. "No, truly I am not fond of her," she replied. "Well if you are not, then I will destroy her," said Bongso. The girl again said that she was not fond of her mother. 
<pb n="44"/>Then Bongso went to the pandanus woman's house. He took the bones of his brothers which she kept inside. He set light to her house and shouted out, "Become pandanus leaf. Become a true pandanus plant." So the woman was killed by the fire and turned into a true pandanus leaf plant. From then on she was never able to put on a human "cloak".
Bongso took all the bones of his brothers and laid them out on the ground. He washed them and placed them in the right positions. Then he blew magical smoke (<ref target="g:GEE2143.027">òz taba</ref>) over them. They became alive again. "Oh, what happened?" they exclaimed upon awakening. "Your penises got cut off by the pandanus woman and you died," said Bongso. "Oh, where is she now?" they wanted to know. "I have destroyed her with fire," he told them. Then the brothers saw the "wind-girl" and asked who she was. "That is my wife," said Bongso. So Bongso blew more magical smoke over his brothers and in the night he and the wind girl slept together. After a few days the brothers were strong enough to walk, so Bongso collected all the knives he had been hiding and they set off to their mother's house. "Is that your wife, Bongso?" the mother asked when she saw them. "It is my wife," he replied. "Where have you all been for so long?" the mother further wanted to know. "Oh, my brothers had their penises cut off by the pandanus woman's vagina and died," said Bongso. "Oh, and where is she now?" "I destroyed her with fire. She has become a true pandanus plant," said Bongso.<note>See also "Taʼ Tahala or the man with the sharp penis" in Part VI. These two legends may be regarded as complementary.</note> 
