NEE023326
<pb n="72"/>A man went hunting. He met a tobowad monkey and shot it. It fell. to the ground. As it fell a howaw fruit also fell down. It did not have any thorns however. The man put the monkey and the howaw in his backbasket and went home. When he reached home he handed the meat over to his wife and told her how the fruit had also fallen from the tree. The wife cooked the monkey and they ate it. When they had finished eating, the man offered the howaw to his youngest brother, Bongso. Bongso did not want it so the man ate it himself. His body became very hot. He went down on the ground and ran around to try to cool off. The wife became very annoyed with him and hit him with some cooking tongs. The husband turned into a tiger and ran into the jungle. A tiger ruwai had entered into the howaw fruit and this was why the fruit had no thorns.<note>In this myth the reason for the undesirable occurrences is that the howaw fruit should not have been eaten, since the absence of thorns clearly indicated that it was abnormal and therefore to be treated with caution. A second point, not specifically mentioned in the myth, is that to eat monkey meat together with fruit is tiger talaiden.</note> 
They all went to sleep. In the middle of the night a sinjae<note>The Chewong believe that some animals are guardians of humans and that they warn them of impending dangers. Others prophesy future events. Several species of crickets are included in the former category.</note> [a species of cricket] spoke to Bongso in his dream: "The tiger, the tiger. It is coming, but it is still far away." The next day they all left the house and ran away. In the evening they built a lean-to on the ground and ate the food they had brought with them. After they had eaten they went to sleep. In the night the sinjae again spoke to Bongso; "The tiger, the tiger. It is coming, but it is still far away." Later in the night the sinjae said, "It is near, it is near." Bongso woke the rest who got up, wrapped a burning log in leaves so that they could see in the dark and started running. When it became day they stopped and built another lean-to [the tiger sleeps in the day-time]. They went digging for various edible roots and after having eaten these they went to sleep. In the middle of the night the sinjae spoke again to Bongso, "The tiger, the tiger. It is still far away," so they continued their sleep. But later it spoke urgently, "It is near, it is near." They got up quickly, wrapped a burning log in leaves as well as pieces of resin they had found, and started running. They arrived at the house of the mother and father of the man who had eaten the howaw. Here they stopped and told them what had happened. 
They were given meat and tapioca and then everyone went to sleep. In the night the sinjae said to Bongso, "The tiger is still far away." Later in the night it said, "It is near, it is near," so Bongso woke everyone, and they made torches and started to run into the jungle. When it became day they stopped and built lean- tos. They dug roots in the jungle, ate, and in the evening they went to sleep. In the night the sinjae again warned Bongso in his dreams; "The tiger, the tiger, it is still far away," but later it told him "It is near, it is near." Everyone got up, made <pb n="73"/>torches and ran. In the morning they arrived at the swidden of friends. They were given meat and tapioca to eat and told their friends what had happened. They slept at the house of the friends and in the night the sinjae said, "The tiger is still far away." Later in the night he spoke again saying, "It is near, it is near." 
Everybody got up, made torches and ran away into the jungle. When it became day they stopped, built lean-tos and went searching for jungle roots which they ate together with the tapioca they had brought with them, and in the evening they went to sleep. In the night the sinjae spoke to Bongso, "The tiger is still far away." Later it spoke again, "It is near, it is near." They got up, made torches and ran. The same thing happened the next day and the day after. 
Then Bongso returned to the place where they had last slept. Here he built a trap with double set of spears on each side. The tiger came, and went straight into the trap. All the four spears hit him and he died. Bongso turned himself into a gibbon and carried the tiger back to the swidden. Then he returned to the others. They did not know that Bongso had been away. In the early part of the night they heard the sinjae saying that the tiger was still far off, but after that they heard nothing. In the morning they said that since they had heard no warning from the sinjae that the tiger was near, they would return home. They were hungry and it was difficult to find wild roots. Bongso did not tell them what he had done in the night. When they arrived at the swidden they saw the corpse of the tiger. They all sat down around the corpse and looked at it. Bongso took some incense and blew the smoke at the head of the tiger. The head lifted slightly. Bongso asked why he had wanted to eat them. "I don't remember," said the tiger, "all I wanted was meat. When I looked at you I only saw meat." Then the head fell back. Bongso blew once more. The head lifted. "Why did you want to eat us?" asked Bongso. "I don't remember," answered the tiger head, "all I wanted was meat. When I looked at you I only saw meat." Then the head fell down and he was dead. The people all returned to their own swiddens where they ate a lot of tapioca, plantains, and hill rice. 
