NEE023328
<pb n="88"/>A man made a small clearing in the forest in order to plant some tobacco. In order to do so he had to cut down a goll tree.<note>The goll tree is a very tall tree. Like the tanòi tree, it is also associated with superhuman beings.</note> This tobacco field was some distance away from the settlement where he lived. After some time he told everybody. "l am going to fetch some tobacco leaves from my new field."<note>It is punèn to mention the real word for tobacco when one is collecting it from afar. Instead the punèn name, "tiger's clearing", (referring to the fact that the Chewong often plant tobacco in clearings caused by falling trees) should be used. Normally a tiger would attack an offender for this kind of "speaking badly" punén, not the yinlugen of a tree.</note>
When he reached the field he saw that the goll tree was still smouldering. He looked at it closely, and in the smoke he saw the yinlugen of the goll tree. As he looked, it turned into the shape of a deer. The man ran away. After he had run for a while, he arrived at another settlement. The people there were clearing a new swidden. "What is up?" they asked when they saw the man running towards them. "l am running away from the goll tree ghost which has become a deer," he told them. He had sat down to rest a little when the deer arrived. The people tried to kill it with their bushknives, but although they cut it, it suffered no injury so the man got up and starting running again. After a while he came to another settlement. Here the people were busily clearing an old field for replanting. "What's the matter?" they enquired when they saw him. "I am running away from the goll tree ghost. I spoke badly and said that I was going to fetch tobacco, and now the goll tree ghost which has become a deer is after me," explained the man. The people there gave him a loincloth for the old one had been torn to shreds in the flight. They also gave him some food. While they were eating, the deer arrived. The people tried to kill it with spears, but it had no effect, and the man ran on. After a while he came to yet another settlement where the people were burning off a new swidden. "What's up?" they asked when they saw him. "Oh, I am running away from the goll tree ghost. There is punén. The ghost has turned itself into a deer," he told them. The people gave him a pair of shorts for the loincloth had been torn off. They had all sat down to smoke when the deer arrived. The people tried to kill it with their knives and spears, but the deer did not die and the man ran on. 
After a long time he arrived at Bongso's settlement. "What's the matter with you?" asked Bongso when he saw him. The man told him everything that had happened, and when the deer arrived, Bongso poured water over it, and extinguished<note>Water is the means of killing the goll tree ghost, which came into existence through fire; thus the two antithetical substances fire and water are opposed.</note> it. Bongso knew that the only way to kill the goll tree ghost was to pour water over it. 
