NEE023312
<pb n="53"/>Once a girl went bathing in the river. She caught a crab which she brought home, cooked and ate. Soon afterwards it was obvious that she was pregnant. The people scorned her for she had no husband. When her time came she gave birth to seven children; three girls, two boys, one siamang and one macaque. After three days the macaque turned into a boy, but the siamang remained siamang. The girl's older brother was very ashamed that his sister had given birth to a siamang. He took the siamang and carried it deep into the jungle where he left it. 
Some time later a boy from a different settlement came to stay at his aunt's house. His aunt was the woman who had given birth to the seven children. In the evening he sat making darts when they heard an animal speaking in the jungle. "What is that noise, auntie?" he asked her. "Oh, that is a siamang," replied she. "I will go and look for it tomorrow," said the boy, and at daybreak he set off in the direction he had heard the siamang the night before. He came to a mountain. Here he waited to see if the siamang called again, but there was not a sound. "This is strange," he said to himself, "last night it was very lively. Today there is nothing." He waited for a while but as there was no sign of the siamang he returned to his aunt's house. In the evening he made more darts. Suddenly the siamang could be heard in the distance. The next morning the siamang was still calling and the boy followed the sound. Suddenly he saw the siamang climb down from a tree ahead of him. He shot a dart but missed. He shot again, but this time he did not hit either. The siamang ran away and the boy followed. He followed it until evening came. By this time he had gone deep into the jungle, so he made a lean-to on the ground and went to sleep. In the morning he was about to return home when he caught sight of the siamang, so he chased it yet again. The siamang headed towards a river, and as it was climbing down towards it, the boy was just about to shoot when he was looking at a girl, not a siamang. It was a beautiful girl. She went towards a house by the river. The boy followed. The girl entered the house and she called out to him to enter. When he had done so, she cooked tapioca and a stew which she gave to him to eat. He spent two days with the siamang woman, and then he returned home to his aunt's house. The woman followed him. They had become husband and wife. When they entered the aunt's house and she had given them tobacco and they had smoked, the girl asked the aunt whether she had once given birth to a siamang child. "No," lied the aunt. "Yes you did, and I am she," said the girl, "you are my mother." 
Then the "father" of the seven children arrived from the river. The crab that the mother had eaten before she became pregnant was a human being who just <pb n="54"/>wore a crab cloak. When he arrived, the mother asked him where he came from. "Oh, I am from the headwaters of the river," he replied, "It was I who was the crab that you ate and that made you pregnant. I am the father of your children." So the mother returned with her husband to his house by the headwaters of the river. He was a true human being, not a bi inhar. 
