NEE023330
<pb n="86"/>Lots of young girls went into the jungle looking for fruits and edible roots. They met a bear-man. He wanted a wife and asked if any of the girls wanted to become his wife. "No, we do not want to," they all said. "We do not want a bear for a husband," some said. "We already have a husband," others lied. The bear walked on. He met two sisters. He asked them to become his wives. "If you do, I will dig topaz fruit for you. I know where to find them," he told them. The girls agreed, and as it was becoming evening the bear went home to his house underneath a fallen tree. The two sisters followed him. He gave them lots of topaz fruit to eat, and then they slept together. The bear was frightened of the girls' bushknives and asked them to leave them outside the house. 
The next day the bear said he would go in search of honey. The wives went as well. He took them to a tree with a bees' nest in it. The bear climbed up while the wives waited on the ground. The bear smoked out the bees, then he reached out his paw and picked up the honey-comb, placed it on his shoulder and climbed down. He put it on some leaves and they all ate. When they had finished eating, the wives pointed to another tree and said, "There is another bees' nest over there. We cannot climb the tree, so you must do it. The bear climbed up, smoked out the bees, put out his paw for the honey-comb, placed this on his shoulder and climbed down again. The wives put the honey in bamboos and carried it in their backbaskets home. 
After many days the flowering season ended and they could find no more bees' nests. They became very hungry, but the bear came across some bees who live in the ground. He took their honey which they all ate. But after a while there were no more of these bees either, and the topaz fruit season was over. There was nothing for them to eat and they were very hungry indeed. One day as they were out searching for food, they came across a tree in which there was the nest of a different species of bees. The bear climbed up and the wives waited on the ground underneath. He first smoked out the bees, then he reached out a paw for the honey-combs, but instead of carrying it down to his waiting wives he gulped it all down. He did not offer any to his wives. He ate alone. Some of the honey got stuck in his throat. He coughed and became a true bear. He was no longer a man-bear because he had eaten alone. So he ran away.<note>Although not specified in the legend, the bear-man is in fact a human wearing a bear "cloak". While wearing the bear cloak, he behaves like a bear and not according to the human code of never eating alone. It is for this reason that he becomes a true bear, having commited an act of <ref target="g:GEE2143.030">punén</ref>. (See also Part II A and Part III B).</note>
One bee fell from the bear's mouth; it followed the girls home.<note>The role of this bee is somewhat unclear. All the Chewong could offer in the way of explanation was that "if the bee had not fallen from the bear's mouth, it would not have pursued the girls or become so large." It is clearly associated with the anti-social act of the bear, and may be a manifestation of the punèn rule which states that unfulfilled desire must not be provoked in others. Breach of this rule causes the other to suffer (usually by being attacked by a tiger).</note> They put it on a <pb n="87"/>roof beam. It fell down. They put it up again. The next morning the bee had become very large. The girls became frightened when they saw it and they ran away. They ran to their grandmother's house. "What is the matter?" she asked when she saw them. "Oh, there is a very large bee," said the girls. The grandmother put some water on the fire to boil. After a while the bee which had been following the girls arrived. It was very large indeed. When it reached the ladder to the house and was about to climb it, the grandmother poured some of the boiling water over it. "Become small bees, become large bees," said the two girls, and the huge bee turned into small bees and into large bees.
