NEE023344
<pb n="116"/>Once upon a time people were very hungry. They did not yet know how to make swiddens and grow tapioca. They only went digging wild roots and tubers. One family consisted of mother, father and two brothers. The younger, Bongso, was not very strong. His mother scolded him for not being any good at digging and carrying roots. They all wanted to eat fruit very much, but there was none on Earth Seven. There was fruit on Earth Six only. They were becoming more and more hungry as they could not find enough to eat. They decided to nöpoh. They made riding, headbands and ruwai string, and they built a special house in the jungle to nöpoh<note>The Chewong do not build a special hut to conduct a nöpoh in, nor do they have a "shaman's hut" as do some of the other Malay aborigines. It is possible that they did make a special platform for such purposes in the past.</note> in. First the older brother sang. But he was not putao, he could not travel up to Earth Six. Then Bongso began to sing. His ruwai became a large bumble-bee<note>A common image used for the putao on a journey into other worlds is that he changes himself into a bumblebee (komagen).</note> and it flew up to Pinto Lancob. This is the entrance to Earth Six and only big putao, dew putao<note>A dew putao is a person whose hot, red blood has been exchanged for cool, white blood by the people on Earth Six. Dew, an important healing element, also becomes his spirit guide. By these attributes, the dew putao is conceptually linked with the bi asal of Earth Six.</note>, can enter, for the opening is obstructed by large stones that roll to and fro. When the people saw Bongso they asked, "Who are you?" "Are you a dew putao?" "No," replied Bongso, but as he said that, he became a dew putao and he was able to enter through Pinto Lancob. The people up there looked at him as he flew from flower to flower. They did not want him to take any fruit with him down below. They ran after him trying to push him off'<note>Although a dew putao may visit Earth Six, and eat as much fruit as he pleases, he may not bring any of the fruit with him down to Earth Seven. This features in much Chewong lore; they always stress, when talking of the bi asal of Earth Six, how much they fear the heat and dirt of Earth Seven, and how jealous (meseg) they are of their fruit.</note>. He flew hither and thither, but they pursued him until they managed to expel him. It is very hot on Earth Seven, but Earth Six is cool, which is why the fruit trees bear all the year round, and the people who live there are very frightened of the heat, and will under no circumstances let any of their fruit be taken down there. But Bongso had managed to bring with him one piece of durian skin. This he put over 'magical' smoke (òz taba), and then he gave it to his mother to eat. When she was full, she passed it on to her husband who ate. When he was full, he gave it to his older son who ate and passed it on to his wife and so on. Everyone could eat from the same piece of fruit and be satisfied.<note>Although the fruit on Earth Seven originates from Earth Six, it is much less potent. The fruit of Earth Six is not only available all the year round, one fruit is sufficient to satisfy the hunger of many people.</note>
The next night they conducted a nöpoh again and Bongso flew up through Pinto <pb n="117"/>Lancob with no difficulty this time. He had become dew putao as well as fruit putao. He could bring fruit. This time he took one durian fruit with him down, and after he had put it over magical smoke, everybody ate until they were satisfied from that one fruit. He then dug a hole in the ground and planted the durian skin. It grew into a huge tree with lots of fruit. Everybody climbed up and picked as much fruit as they wanted. "Don't eat it all, keep some," Bongso told them. The people did not listen to him. They picked all the fruit and filled their houses with it. They smoked it so that it would not go rotten.<note>On the rare occasions that the Chewong catch more meat or fish than they can immediately eat, they place it on a shelf built above the fire, and dry it in the smoke.</note> Then they just ate and ate. They no longer bothered to go searching for roots and wild tubers. When Bongso saw this he moved all the fruit up to Earth Six. Then in the evening they did a nöpoh, and Bongso carried his parents and his brother and sister-in-law up to Earth Six with him. They still live up there eating fruit. The rest of the people down on Earth Seven had no more fruit.<note>What is meant is that from then on the fruit was seasonal and might appear only in small quantities in scattered locations.</note> If they had not given up digging, then they would still have some fruit. But they became lazy and depended on Bongso for feeding them.
