NEE027426
Word-for-word translation.
One village in, what I making uncovered grass among awaked, then, I looked round when, one great ash-tree, iron ash-tree, top on, eagle male, eagle female, eagles two, house having live, I have seen. Eat wish mind I had. I looked when, my neck by the side of very thin cup, very thin tray, sunk into <pb n="13"/> food put in, I ate. Water I killed [I was thirsty]. Also my vessel into water put in, I drank. I was satisfied, sleeping-often awaked. Every day came when, eagle female bird to me to-eat carry to me making, two years, three years I lived. Many times eagles birds with-each-other talked I hearing lived. Now is-going-to [at length] bird-speaking voice I understood. One day living male bird somewhither having gone was not. Three days exactly I waited although return not did. This one day I lived now at last this bird arrived, birds relating one-to-another voice I heard. Thus: 'We brought up child <pb n="14"/> every day came when nurse in-order-to living, not long ago again by us brought up child, again nurse in-order-to I arose, when seas between one island I met. The island - head high stretched, the island-end going into the sea cape stone [beyond] cape road [beyond] the cape road head long was stretched-out. I looked: one large ash-tree standing was. The branches among in staying I looked. The Island head very from above very mighty gods playing-yard the yard-head trodden was. Lower weak gods playing-yard yard the middle high stretched was, I have seen. Thereupon this tree in <pb n="15"/>branches among in passed the night. Now sky's boundary's god-people to play to descend [of] preparing themselves voice I have heard. Now very early morning above gods descended. This playing-yard very mighty gods amused one another yard upon. Next weak gods playing-yard, yard's beginning upon, gods amused one another. Thereupon finished, now break-of-day nigh-ly, island end at, going into the sea cape, stone [beyond] cape road, cape road beginning at god people went. Thereupon god people firstly songs made one with another. After next heroic songs made one with another, next tales also made one with another. After god people <pb n="16"/>legendary-lays again made one with another. After fairy-tales again made one with another. Having finished now break-of-day for made [it made for]. Heroic songs also, songs also, any thing made one with another having finished, after god people reposed, sky to ascended, finished. These gods playing one with another I met, I liked because; now till slowly I was'. Eagle bird, male bird, now the wife then narrated to. I beneath was. Now is going to me bringing up bird speaking the voice well I heard. That after wish toward I had. Living [at] midnight me bringing up bird thither went <pb n="17"/>island to to go wish the mind I had. [At] midnight I rose, when, I have listened when, me bringing up bird-people's the sleeping noises I have heard. Stealthily self prepared, by-the-sea-shore went. Close to the forest, sea-bank close to the sea, sea-bank, I run did. Old little boat one was, prow's the cross-beam [with] my little hand I seized made, sea-shore upon I dragged the oars put-in-position sea surface-upon moved towards the sea afar. That dark day in me bringing up bird thither went island to go wishing I rowed, I was unable, nevertheless rowing going, many times rowed, I was able. Rowing <pb n="18"/>break of day, rowed sitting evening towards, one island me in-front-of have seen. This island to I landed. Having landed looked when, certainly then me bringing up bird male bird whither went, island to I went, landed. Me bringing up bird where passed night tree, this large ash-tree, branches falling [earth] touching tree, leaves under my boat having hidden, I boat beside, myself hid. This being just me bringing up bird [he] told as sky boundary through god people to play to descend gods prepared themselves their voice I have heard. Thereupon now at last <pb n="19"/>gods came together. Very mighty gods as [before] playing yard, yard upon the very mighty gods amused each other. Thereupon finished weak gods, playing yard at, gods amused-one-another. Thereupon finished. After just me bringing up bird [it] told just-as island at end this stone [beyond] cape-road going into the sea cape, cape-road at beginning god people went. Having gone made-one-another to sing. At first songs were, next tales were, next heroic songs were, next legendary-lays were, next fairy-tales were. After finished. Having finished now break-of-day near, god. people reposed. By-side stealthily crawl-ing hiding-myself god people <pb n="20"/>near went. The most little woman god robe took-off, there being stones between pat in hid, this robe I took, little woman's robe rolled-up-myself. Thereupon now god people repose finished. Having finished sky into ascended. Afterwards god little woman child robe in order-to put-on came. This being I-have-rolled-up- myself, to-take wished, could not. Woman child I seized I held. God people upwards ascended finished, afterwards god little woman my boat to I led returned, my boat I dragged; inside god little woman having-put, my village <pb n="21"/>towards I rowed. Now twilight finished. Having rowed [it was] - midnight, my house to arrived. These me bringing up birds now night being both-sleeping apparently were. My house grass-house in entered, god little woman leading entered. Thereupon the-next-day at-break-of-day me bringing up bird the wife to the speaking voice was: "by us brought up child, this Turupa-ic child now till we-bring-up, that-being thither went apparently. Thus being what [should] we do, well? Now by us brought-up child now adult-man became went, wife also possesses. We satisfied being, our country towards <pb n="22"/>go-up we-shall". Thereupon me bringing-up bird this large iron ash-tree top from, me-bringing-up bird's speaking the voice thus: "this thy country the name Rurupa-ic country. Country rich being thy grandfather the people comrades with many were; was however what the bad god Rurupa-ic country ravaged. Therefore thou sole thou remainedst, gods among, [they had] the talk-together; Rurupa-ic country rich men setting-in-order 'inau' made when whatever being god also meeting took, land beautiful being, thou thee bringing up god, gods consulted together although very well thee bringing up god was not, gods all <pb n="23"/>near to impossible being, gods at, gods consulted together, me as regards, bird I am, eagle chief, true my name, Eagle bird chief, my wife with, gods by, bring-up us made. Thee also thanks-to now gods mix from wife thee gave because, thereupon thy country this Rurupa-ic country in thou wilt be if, 'inau' thou wilt make if; 'me bringing up bird eagle chief, eagle bird' thou-saying- now and-again thou 'inau' wilt make, earth possessing god, gods also 'inau' thou making, thou give wilt, if, thee above gods from, gods look above will if, any time also <pb n="24"/>thy country soul suspended will be if; thereupon after, any thing also thee fail not will do". That after eagle bird brought up Rurupa-ic child from, 'inau' making also again the origin is. Thereupon after divine tales, us thanks-to, songs also, heroic songs also, tales also, legendary-lays also, fairy-tales also then eagle chief, eagle bird brought up Rurupa child from coming-forth things. Songs also, heroic songs also, tales also legendary-lays also fairy-tales also come forth are.
<pb n="25"/>Literary translation.
In a village, by some means, I awoke among the grass. When I looked around, I saw at the top of a great 'iron' ash-tree two eagles, one male and the other female, which lived there having a house. I wished to eat. And I saw beside me a delicate cup and tray, with food inside which I ate. I was thirsty; into my vessel they put water and I drank. I was satisfied. I went to sleep and awaked. Every day the female eagle carried food to me. In this manner we lived two or three years. I many a time heard the conversation of the eagles and at last I understood the birds' language. One day the male bird went away and did not return. Three days I waited, but he did not return. At last one day the bird came home. The talk, when the birds conversed one with the other, was as follows: "Every day I think about the child nourished and brought up by us. Some days ago, when I went to feed it again, I found an island in the midst of two seas. One end of the island was high and stretched afar. At the other end of the island there was a cape jutting far into the sea, and beyond it there extended a long reef of rocks. I looked around. A large ash-tree stood there. Placed among the branches, I looked out. There was at one end of the island a beaten playground; one part of it was for the highest and very mighty gods; the middle of it for a playground for the lower weaker gods. It was high and stretched out. That I saw; and then among the branches of the tree I passed the night. Now I heard the voices of the gods, who prepared themselves to descend and play. A little before dawn the gods descended. The very mighty gods played one with another on this playground. Afterwards the weaker gods played one with another at the beginning of the playground. At last they finished, when the break of day was near: the gods went to the end of the island to the cape with the reef of rocks. Then the gods sang ditties to one another. Afterwards they sang heroic songs, then they told stories, then they sang legendary lays, and then they related fairy-tales. <pb n="26"/>When they had done, day-break began. When the gods had ended their heroic songs and the ditties and all the rest, they reposed and ascended to the sky. I met these gods at play; I liked to see them, and therefore I was so late". This was related by the male eagle to his wife. I was below. I distinctly heard the voice of the bird that brought me up, as it spoke thus. After that I had a wish to go thither. At midnight I desired to go to the island, where the bird that brought me up had been: such was my intention. At night I rose and listened. I heard the sounds made by the birds in their sleep. Stealthily I got ready and went to the sea-shore. I ran along the sea-bank close to the forest, and came down to the beach. There was a little old boat. I seized with my little hand the cross-beam that was at the prow, and dragged it along the shore. I set the oars aright, and made for the open sea. That night, wishing to get to the island where the bird that brought me up had gone, I rowed; but could not at first. Nevertheless by rowing more and more, I at last learned to row. I rowed till the break of day. I rowed till the evening; at last I saw an island before me. I landed and looked around. Certainly I had landed on that island to which the male bird had gone. Among the large ash-tree's branches that drooped to the ground, and wherein the bird that brought me up had spent the night, having hid my boat under its leaves, I also hid myself. Afterwards, just as the bird that brought me up had said, I heard the voices of the gods, who prepared to descend for play, passing the boundary of the sky. Now at last the gods came together. The very mighty gods, as before, amused each other on their playground. When they had finished, the weak gods amused one another upon the playground. When they had finished, just as the bird which brought me up had said, the gods passed to the end of the island at the extremity of the reef which went far into the sea beyond the cape; and when they were there, they invited one another to sing. At first they sang various ditties, afterwards they <pb n="27"/>told stories, then they sang heroic songs and legendary lays, and then related fairy tales. At last they concluded. They having finished, it was near daybreak; and the gods rested. Stealthily crawling and hiding myself from them, I went along close to the gods. I took the robe which the youngest goddess had taken off and putting it in between the rocks had hidden; and I rolled myself up in this robe. Then the gods, their rest coming to an end, ascended to the sky. Afterwards the divine girl came also to put on her robe. Because I had rolled myself up she wished to take it, but could not. I seized the girl and held her. The gods had ascended to the sky, and I returned, leading the divine girl to the boat. I dragged it down, put the divine girl inside, and rowed towards my village. The twilight was over, I rowed till midnight and arrived at my house as it was night. Both the birds that brought me up seemed to be asleep. I entered my grass house with the divine girl. The day after, at dawn, the bird which brought me up spoke to his wife as follows: "This child brought up by us, this child of Turupa, which we have brought up till this day, has clearly left us. What have we to do? He has become a man, and has gone away to get a wife. We are satisfied and shall return to our country". Such therefore was the voice of the speech of the bird which brought me up, that came from the top of the large 'iron' ash-tree: "The name of thy country is the Rurupa country It was rich, and thy ancestors lived with many companions; however a certain evil god ravaged the Rurupa country. Therefore thou alone remainedst. The gods talked together: the rich men of Rurupa country arranged an 'inau', all the gods accepted it graciously, and the land became flourishing: therefore the gods consulted together to find a god that should bring thee up well. It being almost impossible, the gods consulted together and obliged us - me the chief of the eagles, my name being 'The chief of all Eagles' - with my wife, to bring thee up. Now thou hast received a wife from the gods. Therefore, if thou wilt live in thy country, this Rurupa country, if thou wilt make <pb n="28"/>an 'inau', and wilt say: "O bird that brought me up, Chief of eagles, eagle-bird", if thou wilt make and give the 'inau' to the god who is master of the earth; and if the gods will look on thee from above; if thou will live quite satisfied at all times in thy country: thou shalt never want for anything". This was the origin of the making of the 'inau', by the child of Rurupa, brought up by the eagle-birds. And the tales of the gods, the ditties, the heroic songs, the stories, the legendary lays and fairy tales are also owing to me, being things that proceed from the child of Rurupa brought up by the chief of eagles, by the eagle-bird: from him come the ditties, the heroic songs, the stories, the legendary lays and fairy-tales. 
