NEE023341
Bongso was out hunting one day. He came across a binturong which he shot. The corpse fell, but the <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref> of the binturong did not die, it became pongkal<note>Pongkal is a being, similar to yinlugen, which may enter a newly dead corpse. It is a zombie, and persues humans in order to eat their <ref target="g:GEE2143.036">ruwai</ref></note> and entered the body of the binturong. Bongso did not know this. He went to gather firewood so that he could cook the binturong. When he returned he saw a slight movement of the body. He realized that it had become pongkal and he decided to run away, but he pretended that he was going for water. He met a flying-lemur. "I shot at a binturong, but did not hit it," lied Bongso. "Now I want to go home. Will you help me get to my house by the sea?" The flying-lemur agreed, and Bongso climbed on to its back. The flying-lemur climbed up to the top of a tree, then it jumped off and glided to the ground. Then it climbed up another tree, jumped off and glided to the ground. Meanwhile the pongkal was waiting for Bongso to return. When he did not do so the pongkal said to himself, "Where is my meat? He must have known," so he set off in pursuit of Bongso. He saw Bongso being carried off by the flying-lemur. The binturong pongkal climbed up a tree, but since he could not glide, he had to jump to a tree very close and work his away along the branches. Meanwhile the flying-lemur climbed, jumped and glided; climbed, jumped and glided. The binturong never lost sight of it, but could not catch up with it either. 
After a while the flying-lemur became very tired. He took Bongso to the house of the flying-squirrel. Bongso told him how he was fleeing from the binturong pongkal. The flying-squirrel told him to sit on his back, and he too climbed up to the very top of a tree, then jumped off and glided to another tree some distance away. Then he climbed up to the top again, jumped and glided. The binturong pongkal saw Bongso being carried by a flying squirrel. "Oh, my food, my meat!" he exclaimed. "There are two of them." He climbed up a tree and tried to jump off and glide as he saw the flying-squirrel do, but he did not know how, and he fell to the ground. Still he pursued as hard as he could. He tried to hit out at them, but did not reach. 
The flying-squirrel came to a tree full of fruit bats. They were all hanging upside down, asleep. The whole tree was covered in bats. The flying-squirrel moved towards the tree. Bongso told him that he wanted to sit on a bat and be flown by him, so the flying-lemur landed in the tree that was full of bats. Only one bat was awake. All the others were fast asleep. Bongso asked the bat if he would carry him to his house by the sea. The bat looked at him. "Well, Bongso," he said, "do you happen to have any fishing hooks?" "I do," replied Bongso, "I do have fishing hooks." "I will carry you if you give them to me," said the bat. Bongso agreed, and he climbed up on the bat's back. The binturong pongkal watched from a distance. The bat took off. He circled around the tree several times. Up <pb n="107"/>and down he went all around the tree. This woke up the other bats, and they all flew up, covering the whole sky. The pongkal could not see where the bat carrying Bongso went, there were so many bats flying hither and thither. So the pongkal had to give up his pursuit of Bongso. 
The bat carried Bongso for a long time towards the coast. When they caught sight of Bongso's house by the sea the bat flew there and landed next to the house. Then Bongso gave him the fishing hooks. That was how the bats came to have claws that look just like fishing hooks.<note>"Members of this family (fruit bats) are distinguished from all other Malayan bats by the possession of a claw on the second digit of the wing." (Medway 1969: 9).</note> 
