NEE023324
<note>This legend is probably derived from the Malays. The Mouse-deer, or chevrotin, is the 'Brer Rabbit' of the Malays. It figures in many proverbial sayings and romances one of which is very similar to the Chewong one related here. In the Pelandok Jinaka, a Malay beast-tale, the Mouse-deer is styled 'Chief of the Forest' (Skeat 1900: 179).</note>
<pb n="91"/>Once there was a mouse-deer that was the husband of a tiger. One day he went to his wife's house. Only his two step-children were at home, "Is that you, Father?" they asked. "It is I," replied the mouse deer, "where is your mother?" "She is out hunting," they told him. The mousedeer sat down. He saw the children's kram<note>The kram is a Chewong string instrument made of a bamboo with one string fixed on it. A bow is stroked on the string, and quite a varied tune can be played.</note>. "Give me the kram," he told his step-children. He played for a little, then he lay down to sleep. He took a long piece of firewood and placed it next to him. "Don't take the kram away from me," he told the tiger children. After a little while one of them wanted to play. He did not know that it was a piece of firewood next to the mouse-deer, he thought it was the kram. He reached out his hand, and he burned himself. "Ouch!" he exclaimed, and the mouse-deer woke up, "I told you not to touch it," he said. There were some pig bones lying in the house. "Give your younger brother some meat to eat," he told the older tiger child indicating the bones. The tiger child gave his brother the bones and one of them got stuck in his throat and he choked to death. "Go and bury your younger brother," the mouse-deer told the other tiger child, who took his brother's corpse and went some distance away. After a little, the mouse-deer called out, "What are you doing?" "I am burying my brother," replied the child. "l told you to eat him," shouted the mouse-deer. A little later he called out again, "What are you doing?" "I am eating my brother," the tiger child replied. "Why, I told you to bury him," said the mouse-deer. A little later the mouse-deer called out "What are you doing?" "I am burying my brother." "I told you to eat him," said the mouse-deer angrily. 
The mouse-deer then returned to his own house. After a while the tiger mother came home from the hunt. "Where is your younger brother?" she asked her child. "l have eaten him, the mouse-deer told me to," he replied. The tiger went to the mouse-deer's house. He was pretending to be asleep. The tiger went over to look at him. She thought he was asleep and she wanted to bite him. "Oh don't bite me. Swallow me whole!" he exclaimed. She did this and then went home. "Where is the mouse-deer?" asked her child. "I have swallowed him," she replied, and she went out hunting. She came across some wild pig. She moved close and prepared to leap at them. "Tiger, tiger! There is a tiger who wants to bite you!" cried the mouse-deer inside her stomach, and when they heard this the pigs ran away. The tiger moved on. She came across a deer. She moved close and when she was ready to attack, the mouse-deer in her stomach cried out, "Tiger, tiger! There is a tiger who wants to bite you!" The deer ran away. The tiger went on. After a while she <pb n="92"/>saw a barking-deer. She prepared to leap at it. "Tiger, tiger! There is a tiger who wants to bite you!" shouted the mouse-deer inside her stomach. So the tiger went home, "There is no meat today," she told her child, "there were voices and the animals escaped." She went to sleep and the next morning she went out to hunt again. She had a bowel movement and the mouse-deer fell out. He and the tiger went along together. They came across a wild pig and the tiger leaped at it and bit it at the throat. She carried it home and she and her child ate it. The mouse-deer only ate some leaves. The tiger then told the mouse-deer that she was pregnant and due to give birth. She asked him to fetch the medicine from the jungle. He went and picked leaves of the wrong kind. They were full of maggots. These he gave to his wife telling her they were the correct leaves for child-birth. She placed them on her vulva and the maggots entered her vagina. The mouse-deer looked at her and said, "You have broken the birth pantang, they were the wrong leaves." The tiger died. The mouse-deer then went to the tiger child. "Where is mother?" he asked. "She died because she did not observe the birth pantang," the mouse-deer told him. The mouse-deer and the tiger child wandered into the jungle. They found some fruit. The mouse-deer placed it on his kneecap and ate it. The tiger also wanted some. The mouse-deer pretended to put some on the tiger's knee-cap and he bit at it, biting off his own knee-cap, and after a while he died. So the mouse-deer walked on alone. He met a couple of elephants. They invited him to spend the night with them. They slept near a precipice. The elephant couple slept nearest the edge, the mouse-deer on the inside. In the middle of the night, the mouse-deer leaped up shouting, "Run, run!" the elephants were so frightened by this that they jumped over the precipice and were killed. 
The mouse-deer walked on. He met a tiger. The tiger wanted to eat him. "Wait, I have just killed two elephants," said the mouse-deer, "come and have a look." The tiger went with him, and when he saw the corpses of the two elephants he became frightened of the mouse-deer. He did not dare to try and eat him. They went hunting together. The tiger killed a wild pig and the mouse-deer a lizard. They put their respective meats in bamboo to cook them. When the tiger was not looking, the mouse-deer changed the two bamboos and then he said, "I am now going to turn my lizard into pork and your pork into lizard." He said spells and told the tiger to examine the contents of his bamboo. The tiger did so and found that his pork had indeed turned into lizard meat, and when he looked inside the mouse-deer's bamboo he saw that the lizard meat had been turned into pork. After that the mouse-deer went his own way. 
After a while he came to a river. There were lots of crocodiles sleeping in a row. Only their heads were above the water. The mouse-deer wanted to cross the river, so he walked on the crocodile heads, kicking each one very hard as he passed. "Ouch!" they all cried out and they wanted to eat the mouse-deer. "No, don't do that," he said, "I won't taste good. I am very old. Look at me, my hair is all white," and so saying he ran away. Later he got thirsty and he wanted to drink some water, but he was frightened of the crocodiles. He moved carefully back to <pb n="93"/>the river and saw that the tiger had arrived. "The mouse-deer hit us on our heads," he heard the crocodiles complain to the tiger, so he ran away. He went to a gob [Malay] Village. "There is gold<note>The Chewong do not have gold, nor do they search for it. They know, however, that the Malays place great value on it.</note> in the river," he told them. "If you follow me I'll show you where to find it." The gob followed him. They wanted gold very much. They built a house on the ground near the river and as it was evening, by the time they had finished, they wanted to go to sleep. The mouse-deer told them to lie in a row with their heads facing the river. He placed himself opposite. In the night he smelled that a tiger was near. It was the same one. He came up to the house and saw all the gob heads lying in a row. He went up to investigate what they were and he bent his head over them to smell. His whiskers got inside their nostrils and they all sneezed. The tiger became very frightened and he ran away as fast as he could. But he ran straight into the river where the crocodiles ate him. The mouse-deer had run away when he realized the tiger was approaching. As he ran in the dark he fell into a deep pit from which he could not get out. An elephant was passing and he looked down at him. "Hey," shouted the mouse-deer, "the sky is falling down. Quick, jump in here." So the elephant jumped in. After a little while a wild cow (sladang) came by and looked down at them. "Quick! Jump down here, the sky is falling down," cried the mouse-deer, and the sladang did as he was told. A deer came by and then a barking deer, and to each the mouse-deer told the same story and they were all down in the pit with him. After a little while, the mouse-deer pinched them all very hard, and the elephant got angry with him and picked him up with his trunk and threw him back up on the ground. Once there, the mouse-deer called to them, "I lied to you, I lied to you, the sky is not falling down." The animals in the pit all cried when they heard this, but the mouse-deer ran away. He went to the Malay prince (raja gob) and he prostrated himself in front of him. "Oh master," he said, "I can show you where you can find elephant, sladang, deer, and barking deer. They have all fallen down into a deep pit." The prince's men followed the mouse-deer, and when they came to the pit, they killed all the animals inside it. The mouse-deer ran away, however, lest they kill him also. 
He sat down to rest near a bees' nest. A tiger came by. The tiger wanted to eat the mouse-deer, who quickly said to him, "I am waiting for the prince's crown," and he pointed at the bees' nest: The tiger looked. "Oh, it is nice, I want to eat it," he said. "No don't do that," said the mouse-deer. "l want to eat it!" insisted the tiger and grabbed at the nest with his paw. The bees swarmed out and stung him all over his body. The tiger ran away screaming with pain. 
Several months later the mouse-deer came across a sleeping python. It lay coiled up with its head resting on top. As the mouse-deer was looking at it the tiger which had been stung by the bees came by, and when he saw the mouse-deer, he prepared to bite him. "I am waiting for the prince's waist-band," the mouse-deer <pb n="94"/>told him. The tiger looked at the python. "Oh, it is very nice," he said, "I want to eat it." "No, don't do that," said the mousedeer. But the tiger insisted, "I want to eat it!" He went over and stretched out his paw and took hold of the snake. The snake woke up and bit the tiger's snout. The mouse-deer ran away. He came to the house of a toad. The toad child was bathing in the river. The mouse-deer went up to it and said that he would help washing it. He took out his knife and scraped the toad's skin very hard. The child ran home crying. "What is the matter?" asked its mother. "Oh, the mouse-deer hurt me," replied the child. The mouse- deer went up to the toad mother and stepped over her head. "It is showing disrespect (tolah) to step over the head of a teacher,"<note>It is tolah to step over someone's head, or to walk close to it. Since the head is not imbued with any ritual significance, it is likely that the practice is an imported one. However, it is interesting to note that it was only by transgressing the rule of tolah that the mouse-deer was finally defeated.</note> exclaimed she. "But you have such an ugly body," said he. Because he had shown disrespect he was caught in an animal trap set up by gob. "Ah, there you can see what happens when you show disrespect to me," the toad told him. "I'll die, I'll die," wailed the mouse-deer. When the gob came to inspect their traps, the mouse-deer pretended to be dead. The gob looked at him. "That mouse-deer has died," they said. "Ka, ka, ka," croaked the toad, but the gob did not understand what she was saying, and they threw the mouse-deer "corpse" away. When they had left, the mouse-deer said to the toad, "Look, the fruit over there is ripe, why don't you eat some?" He pointed towards a red chilli bush. The toad went over and filled her mouth with the chillies. "Ouch, it stings, it hurts!" she cried. The mouse-deer laughed and he leaped over her head. "Tolah! Don't! Tolah!" exclaimed the toad. "Oh, you have such an ugly body," replied the mouse-deer. So the mouse-deer was caught in another trap set by the gob. He pretended to be dead again. He put maggots on his body, and when the gob came to inspect their trap and saw the mouse-deer covered with maggots they said, "This mouse-deer is dead." "Ka, ka, ka," said the toad excitedly, but the gob did not understand and they prepared to release the mouse-deer "corpse". The toad then bit the mouse-deer very hard. "Ouch!" exclaimed he and jumped around. "Ah, he is alive," said the gob when they saw this, and they cut his throat. 
