NEE023353
<pb n="126"/>Ta′ Tahala, whose nickname was Ta′ Totyor<note>I can provide no gloss for either of these names. Ta′ Tahala appears in another myth, "The ghost under the rambutan tree", but the Chewong knew nothing else about him.</note>, wanted a wife. He had, however, a serious problem: his penis was extremely pointed and sharp, and it was covered in thorns. One day he placed some necklaces, bracelets, sarongs, and rings inside a large cane fish-trap and left it on the bank of the river. After a few days a bird spoke to him, "Ta′ Totyor, Ta′ Totyor, there are dead fish in your trap." Ta′ Totyor went to investigate together with his dog. His dog was actually a tiger. Two young girls were inside the trap. They were sisters. He let them out and they went with him to his house, where he cooked rice and gave it to them to eat. In the evening they all slept next to each other and the two girls became his wives, but Ta′ Totyor did not have sexual intercourse with them because his penis was covered in sharp thorns. After three or four nights the sisters said to him, "Ta′ Totyor?" "What is it?" asked he. "Ta′ Totyor, we want to have children," they replied. When he heard this, Ta′ Totyor had intercourse with both by placing his penis between their toes. 
After a while the wives became pregnant in their calves.<note>The abnormal pregnancy reflects the abnormality of the sexual act. In Chewong, the word 'banko' means both calf and to be pregnant, possibly as the result of this (or similar) myth.</note> Several months went by until one day they said, "Ta′ Totyor." "What is it?" replied he. "Oh, Ta′ Totyor, our children are growing very large and the time for the birth is close. You must go and find some bark so that we can make bark cloth for the baby slings," they told him. The following morning Ta′ Totyor got out two large bags of rice and gave them to his wives. Pointing at them he said, "This rice is good and you may eat it. This other bag of rice is poisonous and you must not eat it." Having said this, he and his dog set off. 
The two wives at home cooked some of the good rice and ate it. Then they decided to pretend to have eaten the poisonous rice and they cooked some of this as well, but left it aside. They went to sleep and pretended that they were dead. 
Meanwhile, Ta′ Totyor and his dog arrived at the poal tree and was busy cutting at the bark when a bird called out, "Ta′ Totyor, Ta′ Totyor, the two women at home have died!" "Oh, but I told them that one bag of rice was poisonous," lamented Ta′ Totyor. "Come on, Master, let us go home, the two women have died," said the dog. When they reached the house Ta′ Totyor looked at his two wives. They were asleep, but he thought that they were dead. He saw the rice in the saucepan and tried a little. It tasted very bitter and he vomited. Then he looked at his wives' swollen calves and said sadly, "Oh, and they were so pregnant, too." 
"Master, what shall we do with the corpses, shall we bury them?" asked the <pb n="127"/>dog. "No," replied Ta′ Totyor, "we will make a bamboo raft and send them down the river to where they came from." So they carried the two bodies and placed them on some leaves on the river bank while they built the raft. When it was ready, Ta′ Totyor went up to the two women and looked at them closely. No, they were truly dead, he decided, and he put them on the raft together with all the things he had given them. After a while the girls arrived at their own settlement and they told everybody what they had done. The people there said that they had been very clever. 
Meanwhile, Ta′ Totyor built another large fish-trap and placed sarongs, necklaces, rings and bracelets inside. Two other girls from the settlement wanted the things and they entered the fishtrap. "Ta′ Totyor, Ta′ Totyor, there are fish corpses in your trap," called out the bird. "Come let us have a look," said Ta′ Totyor to his dog. When he saw two girls inside, he asked his dog - which was really a tiger - "What do you say. Is that meat for you?" "No," said the dog, so Ta′ Totyor let the girls out and they went home with him. After a few days they said to him, "Ta′ Totyor." "What?" he asked. "Tat Totyor, we want to make Children," they said, so Totyor had sexual intercourse with them, but this time he did it properly, in their vaginas. But the thorns on his penis scraped their vaginas, and they cried out with pain. After a while they became pregnant. This time the wives were properly pregnant, in their stomachs. As the time for delivery drew near, they said to their husband, "Ta′ Totyor." "What?" asked he. "Ta′ Totyor, our babies are getting large. You must go and get some bark so that we can make bark cloth for baby slings. " The next morning, Ta′ Totyor showed his wives two bags of rice. "This rice is sweet and you may eat it. This rice is poisonous and you must not eat it." Having said this, he and the dog set off to find the bark. The girls cooked the good rice and ate it. Then they cooked the poisonous rice and left it so that Ta′ Totyor would think they had eaten it and died. They lay down to sleep. 
Ta′ Totyor was busily hacking at the bark of a poal tree. The bird called out to him, "Ta′ Totyor, Ta′ Totyor," but he did not hear. The bird called again, this time louder, "Ta′ Totyor, Ta′ Totyor." "What?" said he. "The two women at home have died," said the bird. "Oh, but I told them which rice was good and which was poisonous!" exclaimed Ta′ Totyor. So he and the dog went home. Ta′ Totyor was very sad. He looked at his two wives and their big stomachs. "And they were so close to giving birth," he lamented. "Well, what shall we do?" he asked his dog - which was really a tiger - "are they going to be your meat?" "No, no," said the dog, "we'll build a raft as we did the last time." 
They carried the girls to river, and placed them on some leaves, together with the things that they had been given. Ta′ Totyor looked at them. They were truly dead, he decided. "Let us go home," he said to his dog, "we'll leave them here to be eaten by wild animals." When the girls heard this they became frightened and they called out, "No, no, we are not dead. We lied and only pretended to be dead." Ta′ Totyor was very upset when he heard this, and he told his dog – <pb n="128"/>which was really a tiger - to bite the girls. "They lied to me," he said. The dog then bit the girls and they died properly. The corpses fell into the river and floated down to the settlement. When the people saw them, they said that they had been less clever than the other two girls. No more girls dared to enter Ta′ Totyor's fishtrap, and he went up to Earth Six. 
