NEE023305
<pb n="14"/>A spider man<note>This means that the person was a human male who wore a spider "cloak" (bajo). All the myths in this section are about human beings who wear animal "cloaks". At the end of each story, they all revert to being human only, having had their "cloaks" destroyed by their spouse.</note> lived with his aunt (Baha)<note>The Chewong distinguish terminologically between parents' brothers and sisters with reference to their relative ages, not with regard to whether they are mother's or father's siblings. These terms are also used classificatorily in order to include people significantly older than ego. In such cases the term used is always on of 'older than parent', category.</note>. One day he gave his aunt some bracelets, ear-rings and sarongs and told her that he wanted a wife. "Aunt, take these things and go over to the house there and offer them to the unmarried girls." The aunt went. She arrived at the house and the people were at home. "Step inside, auntie," they told her. She did, and she was given tobacco and betel nuts. Then the wife of the house cooked rice. When they had eaten, the aunt extended her hand to the mother of the unmarried girls. "What is it, auntie?" the mother wanted to know. The aunt gave her the things and said that her spider nephew wanted a wife. The girls did not want to marry a spider so the aunt went home. "Well, aunt?" enquired the nephew. "They did not want to marry a spider," said the aunt. So they went to sleep. The spider slept on the ladder which led from the cooking platform to the main part of the house. 
The next morning the spider told his aunt, "Aunt, take these things and go to the house over there." "I don't think that they will want to marry you," said the aunt. "Go aunt!" commanded the spider, so the aunt went. She entered the house and sat down. The people there gave her tobacco and betel nut. Then they cooked rice. When they had finished eating, the aunt extended her hand to the old woman. "What is it, auntie?" she wanted to know. The aunt gave the things and said that her nephew wanted a wife. "We don't want to, we don't want to," said the girls, "it will be so difficult to sleep together." So the aunt went home. "Well, aunt?" the nephew asked. "They did not want to. Said it would be difficult to sleep together," said the aunt. They went to sleep. 
The next morning the nephew said, "Aunt." "What?" said the aunt. "Take these things and go over to the house over there." "No I don't want to go. The girls do not want a spider for a husband," the aunt replied. "Go, aunt!" the spider insisted. So the aunt went. When the aunt arrived at the house she was given tobacco and betel nut and then a meal of rice. After the meal the aunt extended <pb n="15"/>her hand to the mother. "What is it, aunt?" asked the mother. The aunt explained how her nephew wanted a wife. "There are lots of male dogs on the ground underneath the house if that is what we are after," the girls said. The aunt returned and told her nephew. They went to sleep. The nephew never ate rice or tapioca in his aunt's house. If he had, she would have realized that he could become a human being. 
The next day the same thing happened again.<note>In this and in other stories where the same events take place, several times, I have omitted the full repetition. These are never omitted when the stories are told.</note> While the aunt was away the young girls from the houses she had already been to came to have a look at the spider. He sat on the ladder and looked back at them. None of them wanted him as husband. 
The following day the aunt was sent on her errand again. When she arrived at the swidden, they had just finished making tapioca "bread". The mother was a very old woman and she had two unmarried daughters. These girls were picking lice out of each other's hair when the aunt arrived. "Enter the house, aunt," the old woman insisted. The aunt was given tobacco and betel nuts and a meal of freshly baked tapioca "bread". When they had eaten, the aunt extended her hand to the mother and laid out the things explaining that her nephew wanted a wife. The two girls looked at the things. They wanted them and told the aunt that they would go back to the house with aunt. When they arrived the nephew said, "Well, aunt?" "These two girls<note>Polygamy is not uncommon among the Chewong. Ideally, the wives are sisters.</note> have come to be your wives," said the aunt. The woman cooked rice and soup and then ate betel nut. The spider did not eat. When the women had finished eating there was still some food left in the saucepans. The wives went to sleep on their mat, the spider sat on the ladder up to the next level. When the girls were fast asleep, the spider took off his spider "cloak" (bajo chanbutn) and became a real man. He ate the rest of the rice and vegetable stew. Then he smoked tobacco and ate betel nut. He looked at his two wives. They were fast asleep. He lay down between them and made love to each one in turn. Then he went to sleep. When it began to get light he put on his spider "cloak" and settled down on the ladder. The wives woke up. "There is still some food left over from last night," they said. They went over to look. "No, it is finished. Who has eaten it?" The aunt said she did not know, she had been asleep all night. 
The wives wanted to go for a swim. the spider went as well. He walked between them. When the girls had finished bathing, the husband said that he also wanted to bathe, but that he wanted to do so alone, and he told the wives to go home alone. When they had disappeared he took off his spider "cloak" and put it on a stone. Then he went fishing. He caught lots and lots of fish and left them all by the riverside. Then he bathed, put on his spider "cloak" and returned home, telling his wives that a friend of his had given him much fish and left it by the river. "Go and fetch it," he told them. They did and cooked a large fish stew which they <pb n="16"/>ate, leaving some in the pan, and then went to sleep. The spider waited until they were fast asleep. Then he took of his spider "cloak" and ate the rest of the fish stew, smoked tobacco and ate betel nut. Then, as he had done the night before, he lay down between the two wives, made love to them, and fell asleep. In the morning before it was light he put on his spider "cloak" again and settled on the ladder. In the morning the wives wanted to finish the stew from the evening before. They went to get it. "Oh, it is finished," they exclaimed, "who has eaten it?" The aunt did not know. 
Later that day people came to have a look at the spider and his wives. "Has he slept with you yet?" they wanted to know. "No, we sleep separately," the wives replied. The wives cooked rice and the rest of the fish caught the day before and when the visitors had eaten they went home. The wives wanted to go bathing again so the husband went with them. When they had finished, the spider told his wives to go home for he wanted to bathe on his own. He took off his "cloak", went fishing, left the fish on the bank, put his spider "cloak" back on again, and went home to tell his wives that a friend has given him lots of fish for them to fetch. This they did. They then cooked a stew, ate and went to sleep. The spider took off his "cloak" finished off the meal, slept with his wives and returned to his spider "cloak" in time not to be discovered. This happened every night until one day all the fish had been eaten. The wives said to their husband, "There is no more fish." They all went to the river to bathe, and as he had done before, the spider told his wives to go home on their own as he wanted to bathe alone. But instead of going home as they had been told to do, the wives hid behind a tree and watched the spider. They saw how he took off his spider "cloak" and became a real man. When he went to the river to fish they ran forward and took the spider "cloak" between their fingers and crumpled it up and scattered the pieces. When the husband returned after having placed a lot of fish on the river bank he could not find his spider "cloak" anywhere. "Where is my cloak. My original spider's cloak?" he cried out. On hearing this the two wives leaped out from behind the tree and grabbed hold of his aims. They held one arm each. "I want my cloak, where have you put it?" he demanded. "No, we cannot sleep together when you have your spider cloak," the wives said. So the husband went back to the house as a real man and they all sat down together to have a big meal. After they had eaten they smoked tobacco and ate betel nut. In the night the husband lay down between his two wives. 
