NEE023332
<pb n="82"/>Two sisters went to catch long-tailed giant rats in the jungle.<note>Only women may hunt the long-tailed giant rat. No explanation was given for this.</note> The younger sister caught one. She wrapped it in a klawòden<note>Klawòden leaves are used to plant on the grave of a newly buried person. One is planted at either end, and its subsequent state indicates the fate of the person in the Afterworld. If the klawòden plant dies, this means that no yinlugen has come into existence. It is tiger <ref target="g:GEE2143.041">talaiden</ref> to wrap any game in klawòden leaves, a possible association with the above practice.</note> leaf. To do so is tiger <ref target="g:GEE2143.041">talaiden</ref>. Having done this they returned to their house in the hollow of a tall tree. The younger girl cut long strips of rattan and built spear-traps around the tree and carried the line from each trap into the house. They waited. In the evening a tiger came. They waited until it came very close and was underneath one of the traps, when the younger sister cut the rattan and the spear fell down piercing the tiger. The girls climbed down and they looked at the corpse. They cut off the tail. This they would eat. In those days people still ate tigers. Then they went to sleep. The next morning they went to their mother's house. "There is some binturong<note>The Chewong do not eat tiger today, but they insist that people did in the past. This fact is always divulged with some embarassment, an indication that it was not regarded as "proper". For them to use a euphemism about the tiger further indicates the incorrectness of tiger as food.</note> meat," they told her. The mother knew that they meant tiger, and as she liked eating tiger very much she went off with her backbasket to collect the carcase. The girls only wanted the tail, the rest of the body they left for their mother. 
The two sisters went hunting long-tailed giant rats again. Having caught one they wrapped it in klawòden leaf and went home to their tree house. They collected rattan and made traps all around the tree. This time they did not use spears, but made loop traps. In the evening the tiger came. They waited until it was right underneath one of the traps, then they cut the line and the loop fell over the tiger's head and strangled it. They climbed down and cut off the tail which was all they wanted to have. They cooked the tail, ate it and went to sleep. The next morning they went to their mother's house. "There is 'binturong' meat today also," they told her. The mother was very pleased. She went to collect the carcase.
 The next day they went to collect tiri, a root which if applied to the body makes one itch very badly. They found some and put it in a bamboo. To do so is also tiger <ref target="g:GEE2143.041">talaiden</ref>. Then they went home to their real house, not to the one in the tree. They made traps all around the house and another one just by the ladder to the house. The ends of the lines from the traps they brought into the house. Then they waited. In the evening the tiger came. By chance it avoided all the outlying traps and it reached the house. It put its front paws on the ladder and was about to enter the house when the girls cut the rattan for the trap by the ladder and the loop fell over the tiger's front legs. The girls then took the tiri and wiped it thickly over the tiger's hind parts. The older sister rubbed tiri and the younger sister rubbed tiri, <pb n="83"/>and filially the tiger died from itching. The girls cut off the tail for themselves and gave the rest to their mother. 
The next day after telling their mother about the meat they said to everybody "We are going 'binturong' hunting today." They set off and gathered some more tiri which again they put in the bamboo. This time they went to the tree house but the younger sister was feeling lazy about making rattan traps and instead made a hole in the door to the entrance of the tree house. They suspended the door above the entrance and they climbed higher and sat waiting on a branch. In the evening the tiger came. He climbed up to their house and entered. They let the door fall down and the tiger was caught inside, its tail pertuding through the hole. The girls pulled out the tail and rubbed it with tiri. The older sister took tiri out of the bamboo and rubbed it onto the whole length of the tail and the younger sister did the same. Finally the tiger died from the itching. They then cut off the tail and ate it.<note>This legend is the only one in which the characters utilize a prohibition for their own gain. The person who told me this legend thought it was longer but she could not remember the rest.</note>
