NEE023304
<pb n="17"/>Once the fire went out in all the houses. Only the snake had fire. The young girls went to ask him for fire. "If you will become my wives I will give you fire," said he. "No we do not want to," said the girls, "we do not want a snake for husband. It will be so difficult to sleep together." Two sisters went also to ask the snake for fire. "I'll give you fire if you marry me," replied he. The sisters agreed. The snake then gave them rings and returned with the two sisters to their house. The girls told everybody that they had married the snake. In the evening they cooked rice and ate. When they had eaten they went to sleep. There was still some rice left in the saucepan. The snake did not eat. Snakes do not eat cooked rice. The girls slept at one end of the house, and the snake slept at the other end. Once the sisters were fast asleep, the snake, who was really a man who wore a snake "cloak" (bajo talòden), took off his snake cloak and became a real man. He ate the rest of the rice in the saucepan. He smoked tobacco which he took from the girls' tobacco pouches. Then he ate their betel nuts. Having finished this he went over to where his two wives were sleeping and lay down between and went to sleep. As it began to get light he got up, put on his snake cloak again and went back to his own sleeping place. In the morning the girls said they would finish off the rest of the rice from the night before, but when they went to get it, they saw that the saucepan was empty. "Who has eaten the rice?" the older sister asked the younger. "l do not know, I was fast asleep all night," she replied. During the day the other girls in the settlement - those who had refused to marry the snake - came to have a look. They thought that the snake would have gobbled up his two wives. 
In the evening the girls cooked rice which they ate. There was still quite a lot left in the saucepan when they had finished. Then they went to sleep. When the snake saw that they were fast asleep, he took off his snake cloak as he had done the night before, ate up the rest of the rice, smoked tobacco, ate betel nuts, and then lay down to sleep between his two wives. Before sunrise he got up, put his snake cloak back on and returned to his own sleeping quarters. In the morning the girls wanted to eat the rest of the rice, but found that there was nothing left. During the day the other people in the settlement came to have a look to see if they were still alive or whether the snake had swallowed them. But the girls assured everybody that there was no problem in being the snake's wives. 
The same thing went on for several nights, and finally the girls decided to find out who it was who was eating their rice, smoking their tobacco and eating their betel nuts. They went into the jungle and found some nuts that looks very much like betel, but are poisonous. Then they picked some leaves that look like sireh leaves, but are very bitter, and with these they replaced their real betel nuts and sireh leaves. In the evening after they had eaten, they pretended to go to sleep. The snake thought that they were asleep and took off his snake cloak and went to eat the rice. The girls got up and took his snake cloak and crumpled it up between <pb n="18"/>their fingers. Then they went back, pretending to be asleep. When the snake-man ate the 'betel-nuts' and the 'sireh leaves' he shouted 'This tastes horrible." The girls got up and when he saw them he looked everywhere for his snake cloak. "Where is my cloak? Where is my shirt? My original cloak!" he cried. His wives told him that they had destroyed it because they wanted a real husband. They then gave him a real cloak (bajo) to wear and from then on the snake-man was a real man. 
The next day all the young girls came to have a look at the snake husband. When they saw the handsome man, they became very ashamed because they had refused to marry him. 
