NEE023297
<pb n="31"/>Ta'Prasam came from a place near the sea. He came to have a look at the women in our part of the jungle. One day he arrived at the swidden of an old man who was planting kiœi.<note>Kiœi is a species of tuber cultivated in small quantities by the Chewong. in wild. It does not exist in the wild. It is more favoured than the ordinary tapioca (galeh)</note> Ta' Prasam sat down and took a kiœi, cut it into small pieces and threw it into the fire. The old man looked at him. He was very ugly. His legs were bent and bones stuck out at his hips. 'This kiœi is not any good," he said, "come to my house and eat there." "No," replied Ta' Prasam, "there are people there and they will say 'dirty' (kama) when they see me." "No, I live alone, there will not be anybody else there," said the old man. So they went to the house. After they had eaten, some young girls passed the house. They looked at Ta' Prasam and spat at him. "Dirty," they said. Then the old man's two granddaughters came. They looked at Ta' Prasam and liked him. At this time there were no young men in the settlement although there were many young girls. There was no shortage of male dogs,<note>See also "The spider man". The reference to male dogs in these two myths does not mean that Chewong women regard sexual intercourse with dogs as a possible practice. Rather, by denouncing it as a possibility, the story is demonstrating the undesirability of marriage between members of different species of beings. Dogs are the only animal kept by the Chewong and as such represent a constantly present possibility for such unions, which, by their denunciation are rejected</note> but no male humans. So the grand daughters liked Ta' Prasam, and when they returned to their mother's house they told her that they wanted to go back to their grandfather's house. "Go," said she, "if you want to." They did, and they told their grandfather that they wanted to marry Ta' Prasam. "Don't you find him ugly?" he wanted to know. "No, we like him," they replied, and they became Ta' Prasam's wives. 
After a few days the wives said that they wanted to eat meat. "l do not know how to use a blowpipe," said Ta' Prasam, "but if we go into the jungle, maybe we can find some hòdj<note>Hòdj are large nuts which contain a lot of oil for which they arc highly valued. They are grated, mixed with ash, and baked in bamboo.</note> fruit that the squirrels have gnawed at and have fallen to the ground." So Ta' Prasam went to a hòdj tree deep in the jungle. When he arrived, he threw off his ugly "cloak" (bayo yabod), climbed the tree and picked three fruits. When he was back on the ground again, he put the ugly cloak back on. While he was still wearing the ugly cloak he was unable to climb any tree because he was so deformed. He placed one hòdj fruit on each protrubing hip and carried one in his hands and hobbled back to his wives. "Here are some fruit that the squirrels have caused to fall to the ground," he lied to them. The girls peeled the hòdj, then they grated it, mixed in ashes and put it in bamboos to be baked in the fire. But by this time it was mid-night and the two girls were very tired. "We'll cook it tomorrow," they said "we are too tired and we want to sleep." "I'll cook it," said Ta' Prasam. When his wives were fast asleep, he took one bamboo with hòdj and threw it into the fire. It was cooked immediately. Then he took the second <pb n="32"/>bamboo, and the third, and they were cooked as soon as he had thrown them in the fire. The next morning the wives saw the cooked hòdj and they ate some. Then the older of the two wives said to Ta' Prasam, "Take one bamboo with hòdj and go to the house over there. If we give them the hòdj, they will give us some meat, and I do want to eat some meat." "No, I don't want to," said Ta' Prasarn, "the people there will spit at me and hit me." "Go!" insisted the wife, "they only want to finger you and caress you." So Ta' Prasam went, carrying a bamboo of hòdj. But the people did not want his hòdj, "dirty, dirty!" they shouted and they threw ash and monkey shit at him. He went home and the younger wife took him to the river and washed the ash and shit off his body and clothes. 
The next morning Ta' Prasam again brought hòdj fruits to his wife saying that squirrels had gnawed at the stems and the fruits had fallen to the ground. The wives prepared the fruits, but were too tired to cook it, and as before Ta' Prasam did this by throwing each bamboo into the fire. Because the wives wanted to eat meat they insisted that he went to another house offering hòdj in the hope that they might be given some meat in return, but as before the people threw ash and monkey shit at him. The same happened a third time. Then his older wife told him to take some hòdj to her grandfather, so Ta' Prasam placed one bamboo on each hip and waddled over to his house. "Here is some hòdj fruit which the squirrels have gnawed at," he said, "would you like some?" "Yes, I want it," replied the grandfather. The younger wife brought a bamboo of hòdj to her mother, saying, "This hòdj my husband has brought home. Some squirrels made it fall to the ground. Do you want it?" "Yes, I want it," replied the mother. 
Ta' Prasam then went to the river to bathe. He threw away his ugly cloak and became very handsome. There were some girls also bathing and they looked at him. "Oh, what a handsome man!" they exclaimed. He went to the grandfather's house. Everybody in the settlement came to have a look at him. They offered him tobacco. Ta' Prasam rolled tobacco<note>Whenever Chewong meet, or when visitors come to a house, tobacco is always exchanged. Not to do so would mark the excluded person as an outsider.</note> to give to them, but he tied each cigarette to the next one with a piece of string and when the people who had hit him and thrown ash and monkey shit at him reached out their hands, he pulled the cigarettes away from them. The next day Ta' Prasam went to the river to fish. Many of the girls who had thrown the ashes and the shit at him were there. He crept up behind them and pushed them all into the river. Then he went hunting. Now that he had abandoned his ugly cloak he admitted that he knew how to use a blowpipe. He caught a leaf-monkey. This he brought home and gave to his two wives. He told them that he wanted to return to his own land and the girls agreed to go with him. They liked their handsome husband very much. Ta' Prasarn then went to their grandfather and asked if he wanted to accompany him to his own land. "Yes, but I don't want to leave my tapioca, kiœi and sweet potatoes," he replied. 'There is plenty of that where I come from," Ta' Prasam assured him <pb n="33"/>and the grandfather agreed to accompany him. Ta' Prasam then went to his mother-in-law and asked if she would like to go to his own settlement near the sea. "Oh but I don't want to leave my hill rice, sugar-cane and bananas," said she. "There are lots of those where I come from," replied he, so she agreed to go. 
The next morning Ta' Prasam, his two wives, mother-in-law and the wives' grandfather set off. After they had walked for a while, Ta' Prasam told the others, "l have left something behind. You go on and I will catch you up." He returned to the swidden in the night and then joined the others. In the morning, when all the people back at the swidden woke up they saw that all the tapioca, kiœi, sweet potatoes, bananas, hill-rice and sugar-cane that they had planted had gone. The swidden had become jungle again. Seeing this, they all ran away. 
If they had not spat at Ta' Prasam, hit him and thrown ash and monkey shit at him they could have gone with him to his own land by the sea.<note>No Chewong has ever seen the sea. However, it features in their cosmology and in their myths and songs, when it is always called by the Malay word for sea, laut. Superhuman beings of various kinds are envisaged as living by the sea. All the rivers in the jungle are said to run into the sea, and children's ruwai may be carried by the current to the sea from where the putao try to retrieve them.</note> But because they had behaved in this way he took all their crops away from them. 
