NEE023287
<pb n="4"/>A long. long time ago there was no night on this earth - Earth Seven. The people slept during the day. They did not have fire either. If they wanted to cook tapioca they just put it on the ground. The moon was just another star. One day a boy lost his knife through a hole in the ground. He followed after it and fell down on Earth Eight which was very close to Earth Seven in those days. Old people lived down there. Ya' Rud<note>Ya' means grandmother. It is often used to prefix the name of a woman, and characters in the legends often refer to old Women whom they meet as Ya'. Ya' Rud is an original superhuman being who lives below, on Earth Eight. She is one of Tanko's wives (see "Tanko") and is possibly the same as the Original Snake, or possibly another aspect of her</note> was there and other people who are still alive today. They gave him some food to eat. Then it became very dark and the boy was frightened. "What is this?" he wanted to know. "This is night," they told him. "We do not have night on my earth," said the boy. Then the people lighted resin torches. "What is that?" asked the boy. That is resin torches," they told him. The people on Earth Eight had fire and they made a big one. The boy was very frightened. "What is that?" he asked. "That is fire," they explained. "We do not have fire on my earth," the boy said. The people told the boy that if there was no night all the tubers would die, so they gave him night. They put night in a bamboo for him to take with him to Earth Seven. They also gave him fire, resin for torches and tobacco. The boy returned to this earth. When he poured out night from the bamboo and it became dark the people here became very frightened. The boy explained to them that it was night and that if they did not have night their tubers would die. He then gave them the resin torches and the fire so that they could cook their food. When he smoked the tobacco and the people saw the smoke coming out of his mouth they became very frightened, but the boy told them that it tasted good.
