NEE023288
<pb n="5"/>The people who live on Earth Six above do not defecate or urinate. Their children are metamorphosed flowers. Above Earth Six is Timoh Maro where gibbon (timoh) people live. Above Timoh Maro there are no people although there are different worlds above it. Klarei [species of cicada] also live on Earth Six. Another name for Earth Six is Longsogn or Fruit Island (Putao Plò) 
A long time ago there was a rope which connected Earth Six with this earth where we live today. This rope was called tali reba. Once a man did a nöpoh<note>A nöpoh is the Chewong singing seance. It is done for healing purposes when one or more putao go into trance and send their ruwai in search of the lost ruwai of the sick person. It is also done in order to please the bi asal of Earth Six to ensure a good fruit season. All the members of a settlement participate, and it may go on for several nights (actual numbers unspecified, but the healing ones are anything from three to seven). It is conducted in total darkness with only the incense bowl (òz taba) kept alive throughout in order to give smoke to the various helpful superhuman beings. The smoke of the òz taba is their food The smoke also serves as a path for the putao's ruwai when he returns home. The rest provide the rhythm by banging long pieces of bamboo on wood. Each shaman sings his songs in turn, with the men and women providing a repetitive chorus of each line. The word nöpoh may be used as a noun, indicating the actual ceremony, or as an intransitive verb.</note> [a singing seance] and he started to climb up this rope, but as he was not putao [shaman] he fell down and broke his thigh bone. His son-in-law was putao. He also did a nöpoh and began to climb the rope. His body climbed, not just his ruwai [soul, spirit] as is the case with putao today. When he reached Earth Six he saw all the fruit trees which grow up there, laden with fruits of all kinds. The man took durian; rambutan, payong and other fruits, placed them all on a straw-mat, and wanted to bring them with him down to his own Earth. The people on Earth Six, however, would not let him take any of the fruit away. They are very jealous of their fruit. They told him that the earth where he came from was called Earth Seven, and that it was a dirty (kama) place because the people there defecated, urinated, and shed blood when they hunted animals. They also told him that they would not visit Earth Seven because of all this dirt. The man then descended empty-handed and explained to everybody what he had been told by the people of Earth Six. 
The following day the man did another nöpoh and he returned to Earth Six. This time he took a small piece of durian, but when the people there saw this they ran after him in order to take it back. He ran hither and thither, but was pursued everywhere. Finally he fell off Earth Six and crashed to the ground where he died from the impact. When the other people of Earth Seven went to look at the corpse, they found the small piece of durian in his clenched fist. They took it, cut it into many tiny pieces and scattered them about. The pieces turned into durian trees, rambutan trees, and all the other fruit trees which grow in the forest today. 
The rope which had linked the two earths fell into the fire and burned up. From then on people could no longer climb up to Earth Six. Only the ruwai of the great putao can fly there today.<note>See also "The Ghost under the Rambutan Trees", "Bongso who went to Earth Six for Fruit", "Bujægen Komarr", and "The Moskin who fell from Earth Six" in Part V.</note> 
