NEE023294
<pb n="39"/>Bongso lived alone. He was clearing a new swidden. One day he was working very hard cutting down trees and he became very thirsty. He picked up a bamboo and set off to the river to bring some water. There was a woman in the river. Accidentally Bongso caught her in his bamboo. She leapt out of it and became a woman. She was, however, completely naked, and this made her very shy. She stood with both hands covering her private parts. "Give me your sarong so that I can make a loincloth," she said to Bongso. He was carrying his sarong on his head, and he took it off and threw it to her. The frog woman returned to her house among the Stones in the river and Bongso went home. The next day she went to Bongso's house and they slept together and she became his wife. 
They planted hill-rice in the new field that Bongso had been clearing, and when it was ripe Bongso harvested it. One day Bongso was going hunting and he told his wife to thresh the rice while he was away. She did this by rubbing the rice against her thighs. When Bongso came home in the evening he asked her where the rice was. "I have threshed it all," she replied. It was very good quality rice, and Bongso wanted to take some to his mother. She lived some distance away and he walked over to her house. She looked at the rice. "You know how to thresh rice, Bongso?" she enquired. "l know," he lied. When the mother had eaten all the rice she went to Bongso's house. She went in the evening and when she arrived, she heard that he was eating inside the house, but he was not alone, so the mother went home again. "I think Bongso has got a wife," she told her husband. The next day she went again to Bongso's house, but this time she went early in the morning and she arrived while they were still asleep. She sat on the ladder and waited. When Bongso came out he saw her sitting there. "Oh, it is you, Mother," he said is I," she replied, "I came last night as well, and I heard that there were two of you inside." "No, there is just me here," lied Bongso. "Truly, Bongso, I sat here on this ladder and I heard that there were two inside. You have a wife, Bongso." Bongso admitted that he did, and his wife came out to meet her mother- in-law, "Where did you meet her, Bongso?" his mother wanted to know. "Oh, she is a jungle woman also," he lied. The wife cooked rice which they all ate. Then they smoked tobacco and chewed betel nut, and when they had finished the mother went home again. 
Time passed and Bongso and the frog-woman had two children - one boy and one girl. As they became a little older, Bongso's mother decided that she wanted to live with her grandchildren. "Let us move to our grandchildren," she told her husband. They went and settled down with Bongso and his family. 
One day when Bongso had gone hunting, his mother and her two grandchildren went to the river to bathe. The river was flooded and dirty, but the two children jumped in and swam and frolicked in the water. Their grandmother became angry when she saw their behaviour, "Naughty children," she scolded, "your are truly frog-children." When the children heard her say this they became <pb n="40"/>upset and they were very sullen as they walked home. When they reached the house, their mother said that she needed to fetch some water and the children went with her. "Why are you so sullen?" she asked her children. "Oh, we went bathing with grandmother today and she was angry with us and called us frog-children," they told her. When she heard this the mother did not want to return home. She and the children became frogs and went back to her previous house among the boulders in the river. 
In the evening Bongso returned from the hunt. "Where are my wife and my children?" he asked his mother. "I don't know," she replied. "What have you been telling them?" "Nothing. All I said was that the children were frog- children," said she. "What! You know that my wife is a frog-woman!" exclaimed Bongso. "No, I did not know that," replied his mother, but Bongso ran down to the river where the stone house was. He was very fond of his wife and his children, so he turned himself into a frog and entered their house. 
The next day Bongso's father went to the river to bathe. The children saw him. They were fond of him, he had always been good and did not get angry with them. "Come into our house, grandfather," they called out to him. "Where are you my grandchildren, I cannot see you," he replied. "Over here, grandfather," said they, stretching out their hands to guide him. But the grandfather could not enter the house among the stones. He was not a putao. Only Bongso could turn himself into a frog. 
