NEE023301
<pb n="23"/>Once there was a young girl who went into the jungle to look for sirih leaves. A very large caterpillar was eating the leaves. It jumped onto the girl's shoulder. She ran home, but the caterpillar could not be shaken off. When her mother and father saw the huge caterpillar on their daughter's shoulder, they picked up a large stone each and started running. The girl ran as well. They ran hither and thither, all the time not letting go of their stones. Finally both parents died. They were old, and running with the stones proved too much for them. They were not strong. So the girl ran on alone. After a while she came to a lamer fruit tree. The caterpillar told her to get some of the fruit. He descended from her shoulder so that she could climb the tree. There was a squirrel up in the tree. Indicating the fruit, he said "This is my meat,"<note>We find in several of the myths that various conscious non-human or superhuman beings refer to their particular food as either their "meat" (ai) or their "staple" (ratn). See my remarks in the Introduction about the Chewong relativistic view of reality, manifested mainly through the different eyes of the various beings.</note> when he saw the girl. "What are you doing here anyway?" he wanted to know. The girl told him how the huge caterpillar had settled on her shoulder and how her parents had been running, and how they had died. The squirrel said he would help her. First he gave her a squirrel "cloak". "Put this on, dehe," [aunt younger than parent] he told her. Then he took a liana that was growing on the tree, gnawed at the part where it was attached to the tree and threw it down to the ground. "Climb up on this liana!" he called to the caterpillar waiting on the ground, "there is lots of fruit here." The caterpillar thought it was the girl speaking and he began to climb. When he was halfway up, the liana broke and the caterpillar fell into the river where it was eaten by fish. 
The girl, wearing her squirrel cloak, followed her squirrel nephew through the trees. They travelled for many days. Then they came to a settlement. It was the settlement of the girl's relatives. Her aunt, baha, [older than parent] had a house there. It was evening. The girl climbed down from her tree and took off her squirrel cloak. The real squirrel went his own way. The girl went to the river to bathe and then walked up to the house. There were people inside. Bongso went down on the ground. He saw the girl, but did not speak to her or ask her to enter the house, so she went away again, put on her squirrel cloak and went to sleep in the field. When Bongso had eaten, he suddenly remembered the girl. "There was somebody here today," he said, "where is she?" He went back down on the ground to have a look for the girl, but he could find her nowhere. 
The next day the girl, still wearing her squirrel cloak, climbed a gahogen tree to eat the fruit. Bongso was out hunting. He saw the squirrel up in the tree and he shot at her. He hit her in the thigh. The squirrel ran off. She was feeling sick. She went to a hollow in a tree. She lay down inside, and here she died. Meanwhile Bongso was looking for the squirrel that he had shot. He came across the tree hollow and saw the girl's corpse. He realized what had happened, and he carried <pb n="24"/>the girl back to his own house. Here he laid her down and blew magical smoke (<ref target="g:GEE2143.027">òz taba</ref>) onto her. She became alive again. They slept together. In the morning Bongso's older sister went to see her brother. He and his new wife were still asleep. "There are two people in there," said the sister to herself, and she went to her mother's house and told her that there were two people in Bongso's house. "Maybe he has got a wife," the mother wondered. She went over to investigate. "Is that you, Mother?" asked Bongso. "It is I" replied she. "What do you want?" asked Bongso. "Oh, your sister said that there are two people here," said his mother. "No, there is just me" lied Bongso. "No, there are two of you." insisted his mother; so she met her daughter-in-law. Later, everyone in the settlement went to look at their new sister-in-law, niece, aunt or whatever. "You must come to my house and eat," said the sister who had first discovered the wife. 
A few days later the girl went into the forest. She met the squirrel who had given her the squirrel cloak. "Oh, it is you, nephew," said the girl. "You remember me? You gave me a squirrel cloak when I was running with the caterpillar on my shoulder. I have a husband now, so I no longer want the cloak." 
