NEE023323
A man [an elder brother] went hunting. He came across a large house in the jungle. There were no people about. The people who lived in the house were cockroach people, and they were all siting underneath the house wearing their cockroach "cloaks". The man did not know this so he entered the house. He put down his quiver on the floor and after a while he fell asleep. A cockroach child saw him lying there. "Mother, mother, there is some meat," she said. All the cockroaches entered the house and started biting at the man. They ate his flesh. 
The next day another brother went hunting. He wanted also to find his older brother. He came across the path that the brother had taken the day before. This he followed until he arrived at the same large house in the jungle. There was nobody about, so this brother entered the house as well. He saw his older brothers' quiver lying on the floor. He took off his own quiver and placed in next to his brother's and sat down to wait for him. After a while he fell asleep. The same cockroach child who had discovered the older brother the day before also saw this man, and told her mother, "Mother, mother, there is some meat." So all the cockroaches entered the house and started biting at the man. They ate his flesh. 
The next day another brother set off looking for his two brothers and the same thing happened to him. The day after that a fourth brother suffered the same fate. 
The following day Bongso went as well. He was <ref target="g:GEE2143.032">putao</ref>. He knew. He found the path that his brothers had taken and followed it until he reached the house. There was nobody about. He entered the house where the quivers of all his brothers were lying on the floor. Bongso went to the river to bathe. He found the scattered bones of all his brothers and placed them next to each other on the ground. He blew "magical" smoke on the bones. They became corpses. But there was still no breath, so he blew smoke yet again and all the brothers came alive. They set fire to the house, and all the cockroach people died. They became only ghosts. From then on there were no more cockroach people. There were true cockroaches only. 
