NEE023289
<pb n="45"/>Taʹ Tayog<note>Grandfather long-tailed Macaque.</note> went to an old woman's house. She gave him poal<note>The bark of the dog tree is also used for making bark cloth.</note> bark so that he could make bark cloth for a loin cloth. It was very heavy. He carried it to his friend Komai Bill's<note>Species of worm/ caterpillar.</note> house and asked him to help him carry the wood. "It is very heavy this wood that grandmother gave you," said Komai Bill and threw it to Taʹ Tayog who carried it for a while and then threw it back to Komai Bill. They walked on, throwing the piece of bark to and fro, when after a while it became a human being.<note>The bark that they had been given was in fact a man who had put on a poal bark cloak. This was why it was so heavy to carry.</note>
"Let us go to granny's' house," said Taʹ Tayog, "it is not far away." They walked on and came to a very large orange. It was the house of nlab<note>Nlab are a class of bas who eat human flesh never their ruwai. They always appear in human form, but their eyes are different.</note> bas. Only an old woman was at home. "Is that you, grandchild?" she called out. "It is I, Granny," replied Taʹ Tayog, "where is everybody?" "They have gone hunting 'macaque',<note>A euphemism for human beings.</note>" said she, "I am all alone at home. The others won't be back until the evening. I am afraid I have no meat to offer you." Taʹ Tayog and Komai Bill entered the house and Taʹ Tayog put a piece of resin used as a torch on a roof beam. "It is better up there, it will give good light when you eat later," he said. The poal bark which had become a human being sat in a tree nearby. The old woman caught sight of him. When she looked at him, she did not see him as a human, she saw him as a squirrel. Nlab have different eyes from us. "Oh what a pretty pet" she exclaimed and wanted to take him down. "Careful, Granny, it will bite," warned Taʹ Tayog, but the nlab woman did not heed him and she put him on her lap. He took out his knife and cut her on the thigh. "Ouch, it bit me," she cried. "I told you so, Granny," said Taʹ Tayog. After a while the other nlab returned home with a 'macaque'. "Ah, meat, meat," said the old woman. "Look, the pet bit me," she told her husband, but he told her to prepare the food, and then he lighted the resin up on the roof beam. The nlab boiled the human being they had caught that day. Komai Bill sat on the floor with the nlab, but far away in a corner. Taʹ Tayog had moved up on the roof beam. The nlab did not know that they were there, they thought they had gone home. Suddenly Taʹ Tayog shouted, "I'll burn you!" and he threw the lighted torch down at the nlab. It burned everybody badly, in the eyes and on the face. They ran out screaming. Only the old woman and a young girl who sat with Komai Bill escaped. "It is the ghost of the 'macaque' which has come," said Komai Bill and he and Taʹ Tayog went home. The next morning they went back to the nlab house. "Oh, the ghost of the <pb n="46"/>'macaque' came last night and burnt everybody with the torch," the old woman told Taʹ Tayog. "We must nöpoh this evening," she told them. When it was dark they did nöpoh. The old woman and the young girl played the drums and Taʹ Tayog and Komai Bill took turns in singing. After a while they demanded in a song that they must be given rice, so the old woman gave them a bagful. They went on singing. A little later they demanded bananas, so the old woman went out and cut three bunches of bananas from her field. They went on with the singing but after a while they demanded kiœi tubers. The girl went out and dug several tubers of kiœi which she gave them, and they continued their singing. A bit later they said that they wanted the pig<note>A being who has caused illness or misfortune will demand from the shaman some object in return for either giving back the abducted ruwai, or removing the harm. Taʹ Tayog and Komai Bill used this knowledge to further their own ends.</note> that the nlab kept. The old woman went out and stuck the pig and killed it and gave it them. Taʹ Tayog took all the food they had been given and carried it to Komai Bill's house. Komai Bill went on singing alone. When it became light they stopped the nöpoh, and the old woman gave Komai Bill some tobacco and he went home. The old woman and the young girl then went to sleep. All the other nlab were lying inside the house sick from their burns. At mid-day Taʹ Tayog and Komai Bill returned. They set light to the nlab house shouting, "You are dirty (kama) you eat people!" All the nlab inside the house were burnt to death. 
Taʹ Tayog and Komai Bill started walking into the jungle. In the evening they built a lean-to and ate the provisions they had brought and which the nlab woman had given them, and then they went to sleep. The next day they came to a large river. Komai Bill climbed a tree which had large leaves, and he picked two. These were to serve as their rafts, and they sat on one each and started downstream. Komai Bill who was very light spun round and round on the leaf. After a while they came to a spot where many young girls from a nearby settlement were bathing. Taʹ Tayog went up to them and started laughing and talking, but Komai Bill hung back. He was shy. The girls went home and Taʹ Tayog went with them. Komai Bill followed at a distance. Taʹ Tayog went into the house with the girls, but Komai Bill sat with the men. The girls cooked plantains and gave some to Taʹ Tayog who gulped them down without taking the peel off. "Oh, that is a dirty (kama) way to eat," the girls told him, but Taʹ Tayog took no notice. 
In the evening the girls were threshing hill rice. Taʹ Tayog went out to them, and tearing two bits from his loin-cloth he gave these to two of the girls; thus they became his wives.<note>The gift of a Sarong to a young girl is a traditional way to offer marriage. Taʹ Tayog makes the gesture; but does not deliver the proper gift.</note> They cooked rice and Taʹ Tayog demanded two and three platefuls. In the night he slept with both his new wives and had intercourse with them both. Komai Bill slept with the men. One of the girls wanted to marry him, but he was still shy and refused. 
<pb n="47"/>The next day Taʹ Tayog said to his mother-in-law, "Do you want a new field cleared and rice planted?" "Yes, if you want to make one," replied she. He told her that he would start cutting away the undergrowth, and off he went. Once he was inside the jungle he went to join his tayog monkey friends and he sat chatting with these until evening, when he returned home. On the way he passed several banana trees belonging to his mother-in-law and he helped himself to the fruit. When he reached the house, he exclaimed, "Oh, I am so hungry, I have been clearing the undergrowth all day." "Give your husband some food," his mother- in-law told her daughters, "he has worked very hard today. " The wives cooked rice and gave it to him. He gulped it down, not caring that he scattered rice on the floor and over his body. This he just picked up and ate as well. The wives looked at him. "That is dirty (kama)," they said, but he took no notice and just carried on eating. The next morning he said he was going off clearing more of the undergrowth, but he just went to see his friends. In the evening he ate lots of his mother-in-law's papayas on the way home, and yet he insisted that he was very hungry. "I have finished clearing all the undergrowth," he told his mother-in- law, "tomorrow I shall start cutting down the trees." His mother-in-law liked him very much. He was such an energetic son-in-law. By this time Komai Bill had married another of the girls, but since he went off every morning saying that he was making darts for his b1owpipe she liked him less. 
In the morning Taʹ Tayog asked for an axe and set off. When he arrived at the spot where he was supposed to be clearing the field, he cut down a few saplings. Then he climbed a tall fruit tree and spent the day eating fruit and sleeping. Towards the evening he climbed down, took the axe and hit it against a stone. The axe split. Then he set off for home, stealing some more of his mother-in-law's bananas on the way. When he reached the house, he showed his mother-in-law the split axe and told her that this had happened when he was cutting down a very tall and large tree. "Oh, never mind," replied she, "we have lots of axes." The next two days he did the same, breaking an axe every day, saying that he was cutting down such very large trees. On the third day he said "I have finished cutting down the trees. Now I shall wait for one day to let it all dry up, and then I shall burn it all." His mother-in-law was very pleased. She liked her son-in-law a lot. She said to Komai Bill, however, "Darts, darts, all you make are darts. Why don't we see some meat as a result of all those darts." The next day Taʹ Tayog went to the field in order to tidy it up a little, he said. He collected lots of pieces of resin used for torches, and then he went home. After a few days he said, "Tomorrow I shall start burning off the new field," and in the morning he set off. He set light to all the resin he had collected in a pile, and the people back at the settlement saw all the smoke. Towards evening he burnt a hole in his loin-cloth with the tip of his cigarette before returning home. On the way he helped himself to his mother-in- law's bananas and papayas, and yet when he arrived at his mother-in-law's house he said that he was starving. She told her daughters to prepare food for him quickly. Then she saw the hole in his loin-cloth. Taʹ Tayog pretended surprise, <pb n="48"/>"Oh I must have burned it while was busy working, " he said. The next day he set off to continue the burning, but again he just set light to the resin, and spent the day sleeping. Towards evening, he covered himself in soot and went home. "Quick, help wash your husband, he has been working very hard today," his mother-in-law told her daughters when she saw him. She was very pleased to have got such an energetic son-in-law. On the third day Taʹ Tayog lit the resin, and then as he was about to go home he set light to his loin-cloth with his cigarette, so that when he arrived at the house there was smoke rising from the back of his loin-cloth. "Oh dear!" exclaimed his mother-in-law when she saw this. She ran and fetched some water with which she extinguished the smouldering. "I never noticed," said Taʹ Tayog. "I was working away all day. My loin-cloth must have caught tire when I got too close to a burning tree." "I'll come with you tomorrow and help you," said his mother-in-law. "Your friend," she indicated Komai Bill, "does nothing all day but make darts. If only we could see some meat." Taʹ Tayog then became angry with Komai Bill for being so lazy. After a few days Taʹ Tayog said, "Tomorrow I shall plant the rice." His mother-in-law gave him a bag full of rice to plant, and when he got into the jungle he called his tayog monkey friends and they cooked all the rice and ate it. The next day he was given another bag of rice to plant, and again he called his monkey friends and they ate the rice between them. By now all his mother-in-law's rice was finished and the following day she gave him her husbands's rice to plant. 
Komai Bill and his brother-in-law went fishing in a nearby river. On their way home the brother-in-law said, "Let us go and have a look at Taʹ Tayog's field." When they got there they saw that there was no field. They saw the pile of burned resin and the husks from all the rice. They returned home and after they had eaten, the brother-in-law told his mother what he had seen. "My rice, my rice!" she exclaimed, then she turned on Komai Bill, "You came here and told us you were real people, but you are nothing but tayog monkeys and bawœg monkeys. She was very angry. She went out on the path to wait for Taʹ Tayog's return. When she saw him coming she called out, "Come over here." When he was very close, she threw her ladle at him. It hit him on his buttocks and it became a tail. That is how tayog monkeys got their tails. "You came here and pretended you were a real person," she shouted at him, "but you are nothing but tayog and bawœg monkeys. Taʹ Tayog ran away. He became a real tayog monkey from then on. 
Back at the house everyone was very angry with Komai Bill, so he left in the morning and went to the field that he had been clearing in secret. He was a "hidden person" (bi inhar) so no one had heard him felling trees nor seen the smoke. He had only been pretending to make darts all this time. When he left, his wife followed after him. When she arrived at the field she saw Komai Bill sitting inside a newly built house. She thought that he had gone to see a friend, but it was Komai Bill's own house. He was asleep inside. His wife woke him up. She was sick with hunger. All the rice, bananas, and papayas at her own field had finished <pb n="49"/>because of Taʹ Tayog and the people there had nothing to eat. Komai Bill's wife said that she was terribly hungry. He went out and brought back a sugar cane. "Here is your food," he told her. She complained that it was not enough. "You go to the river and have a bath, and then we will eat afterwards," he said. "No, I don't want to. I am so hungry," she objected, but Komai Bill insisted and she went. While she was away, Komai Bill took the leaves from the sugar cane. "Become rice," he said, and when his wife returned she saw two bags full of rice. They cooked some and ate. After they had eaten Komai Bill told her that when everyone thought that he was making darts, he had in fact been clearing the field and building the house. The wife then went to sleep, and Komai Bill planted the rest of the rice. It ripened in one night, and the next morning his wife saw a whole field full of ripe rice. 
After a few days Komai Bill's mother came Visiting. His wife saw her coming, but to her eyes she was a huge worm. She ran indoors and told her husband, "There is a very large worm coming this way," Komai Bill said some spells over her eyes, and when his wife looked at the worm again, she saw it as a real person. 
The next day the wife returned to her parents' house carrying a large bag of rice. They were very hungry indeed by this time and ate the rice very quickly. Their daughter then told them, "My husband and his mother are real people. It was only Taʹ Tayog who was a tayog monkey." She told them how Komai Bill had cleared the field, built a house and planted rice. Her mother became very ashamed when she heard this, because she had scolded him for being lazy and then she had been very angry with him when she discovered what Taʹ Tayog had been up to. Her liver was very small.<note>The liver is the seat of the emotions according to Chewong belief. They often express inner states metaphorically in terms of the liver. In this case, they mean that she was feeling very ashamed.</note> Komai Bill's wife then asked them all to move to her husband's field. They agreed, and went, but when they arrived her mother would not enter her son-in-law's house. She was so ashamed and shy. She sat on the ground some distance away, and would not come and eat. In the evening she went over, however, and greeted her son-in-law formally by extending her hand three times to him. She was very shy. Komai Bill told her not to worry. 
So they all lived at Komai Bill's settlement. After a while his wife became sick. She wanted to eat something sweet. Her mother went into the jungle and cut down some manao<note>Manao rattan (seg manao) is a species of large cane which when cut give forth a sap which is said to be sweet. The manao however, cannot be cut "because it is people." The manao people are superhuman beings and powerful spirit-guides, and to cut the plant would be to hurt them.</note> rattan which she cooked and gave to her daughter to eat. When Komai Bill saw what his mother-in-law had done, he ran away and he became manao rattan. All the other people turned into a species of poisonous ants (siœg).
