NEE023306
<note>Tanko is the superhuman being who, together with the Original Snake punishes those talaiden offences which involve laughing at animals. (see "Snake Talaiden One" and "Two") He is also a punisher of incest, an offence known simply as tanko. The above myth is the only direct "theological" evidence the Chawong have for the incest rule, and it refers only to that between aunt and nephew.</note>
<pb n="12"/>A long time ago everybody went to plant hill rice in a newly cleared swidden. Only a young man and his aunt (dehé) were at home. They took turns in picking lice of each other's hair.<note>The only adult people of opposite sex who may pick lice out of each other's hair are husband and wife. To do so indicates physical intimacy and is a metaphorical way of talking about sexual union. This myth is quoted when the Chewong explain Tanko's role as punisher of "incest," tanko. (See also Part IV</note> Tanko came down from his house in the clouds. He went up to an old man planting rice and greeted him. He saw the aunt in the distance. "That is a very pretty girl," he said, "I want to have a closer look at her." He went up to the house where the two were picking lice. "Your aunt is very attractive," he said to the young man. "l want to sleep with her," he added: "Well, that is up to the girl herself," said the man. "I don't want to," said the girl. "Come with me into the forest and we will sleep together," insisted Tanko. But the girl refused. "I will come back later and we will get married," Tanko told her. He returned to the swidden and told the old man that he was going home, but that he would return in seven days in order to marry the girl. Having said this, Tanko went up to his own house. 
Seven days later Tanko sent down a ray of lightning with which he picked up the girl and her nephew. He pulled them into his house in the clouds. First he took the aunt, laid her over a piece of wood, hit her over the head and threw her to his dogs, which ate her. Then he picked up the nephew, laid him over a piece of wood and hit him on the head. Having done this, he threw him to his dogs as well. Tanko had lied about wanting to marry the girl. He only wanted food for his dogs. 
