NIP028788
<pb n="93"/>Eerin the Daen was a very light sleeper, and when at night an enemy tried to steal into the camp, to spear some one of the tribe or crack a skull with his boondee, there was no chance of his being able to do so if Eerin was there. For no sooner did the enemy get within spear-shot of the camp than Eerin would cry out: "Mil! Mil! Mil!" which was, "Eye, Eye, Eye," meaning his tribe were to look out, there was danger threatening.
And when at length Eerin died, the Daens all grieved much, saying that now indeed their enemies would sneak upon them, and they be unwarned, for none could hear as did Eerin the light sleeper.
They placed the body of Eerin in a bark coffin which they painted all over with red ochre. Before the ochre dried the oldest wirreenun ran his thumb-nail from one end to the other, then across the coffin, leaving thus divisions in the ochre forming a cross. This done they corroboreed round the coffin, singing one of the death chants. Towards evening they lifted up the coffin and carried it to the grave they had dug. The mourners were all painted, and had leaves and feathers in their hair, dheal tree twigs round <pb n="94"/>their wrists, knees, ankles and waists, also through the holes in the cartilage of the noses. They carried bunches of dheal twigs too in their hands.
When they reached the grave they laid some logs in the bottom, which they thickly covered with dheal twigs, on the top of which they put the coffin, as a wail went up from all assembled, the mournful death wail of the tribe which rose and fell in wave-like cadences.
Then an old wirreenun stood up and spoke, telling them that as Eerin was now, so some day they all would be, and it behoved them to keep well the laws of Byamee lest, when their spirits reached Bullimah, they were not allowed to stay nor to wander at will, but were sent to the Eleänbah Wondah, the abode of the wicked.
After this address more twigs were thrown on the coffin, then the things belonging to the dead were placed in the grave, rugs, weapons and food, which would be wanted. on the journey to the sacred mountain, Oobi Oobi.
While this was being done the oldest male relative stood in the grave to guard the body from the Wondah until the earth covered it. He stood there while a chant somewhat as follows was sung:
	"We shall follow the bee to its nest in the goolabah;
	We shall follow it to its nest in the bibbil-tree.
	Honey too shall we find in the goori-tree,
	But Eerin the light sleeper will follow with us no longer."
Then the mourners wailed until the wirreenuns chanted again:
	"Many were the days when we took our nets to the river;
	Many and big were the cod-fish we caught in them,
	But Eerin the light sleeper will go no more to the river;
	No more will he rub himself with the oil of cod-fish,
	Eerin will never eat again of the cod-fish."
<pb n="95"/>Then, as the wirreenuns paused, the wailing was loud again until they began once more the dirge:
	"We shall spear Bohrah on the moorillas,
	And Dinewan shall fall when we throw,
	But Eerin will hunt with us no longer,
	Never again will Eerin eat of our hunting.
	Hunt shall we often, and oft shall we find;
	But the widow of Eerin will kindle no fires for his coming,"
Loud again was the wailing, then on went the voice of the wirreenun:
	"Never again shall the voice of the light sleeper
	Cry 'Mil, Mil, Mil,' as an enemy nears us.
	Cracked will our skulls be and speared our bodies.
	Eerin can warn us no more with his cry,
	Only his spirit can come to us ever, an offering let us now pour to it."
Then with loud wailing, seizing stone knives and comeboos, the mourners cut themselves, letting their blood drop into the grave. Never before was there such a blood offering. Then the earth was thrown quickly into the grave, while some of the mourners corroboreed round it, crooning a dirge.
When the earth was filled in, all stood in a dense smoke that the wirreenuns had made of Budta twigs, which was to keep them free from the unseen spirits known to be hovering round.
When the grave was filled in back to their new camp went the women, for the old one was now gummarl, a place of death, with a marked tree showing it was taboo.
No children, or women with children who could not walk, were allowed to go to the funeral.
After the women left, all the men stood round the grave, <pb n="96"/>the oldest wirreenun at the head, which faced the east. The men bowed their heads as if at a first Boorah, the wirreenun lifted his, and, looking towards where Bullimah was supposed to be, said: "Byamee, let in the spirit of Eerin to Bullimah. Save him, we ask thee, from the Eleänbah wundah, abode of the wicked. Let him into Bullimah, there to roam as he wills, for Eerin was great on earth and faithful ever to your laws. Hear, then, our cry, O Byamee, and let Eerin enter the land of beauty, of plenty, of rest. For Eerin was faithful on earth, faithful to the laws you left us."
Then, standing round the grave, all wailed the goohnai, or death dirge.
Then the men covered the grave with boughs of dheal trees and swept a clear space all round it. By the tracks on that space in the morning they would know of what mäh was he who had caused the death of Eerin. If on it was the track of an iguana then had one of the Beewee clan done it; if the track of an emu, then was a dinewan guilty.
The widow of Eerin had put mud over herself, daubing her head and face with white. She slept beside a smouldering smoke all night.
Three days afterwards the Daens made a fire by the river. They chased the widow and her sisters down to it. The widow caught hold of a smoking bush from the fire, put it under her arm, and jumped into the middle of the water. As the smoking bush was going out she drank a draught of the smoky water. Then she came out and stood in the smoke of the fire. When she was thoroughly enveloped in the smoke she called to those in the camp, <pb n="97"/>and, looking towards her husband's grave, she called again. Those in the camp called to her that his spirit, had answered; she might speak now. She had been obliged to keep silence, except for death wails, since Eerin's death.
Back she went to the camp. A big smoke was made, and the whole camp smoked. Every time a stranger came the widow made a smoke, until the time arrived when the nearest of her husband's kin could claim her for his own.
For some months after the death of Eerin, every time a stranger came to the camp, early the next morning he would sing the goohnai, or dirge; then each man would take part in turn, until all were singing. Then they all moved out of their camps and gradually closed round into a smaller circle, when they would cease singing, sit down, and, rocking their bodies to and fro, they would cry and wail.
When the time of mourning was over an enemy came again to attack them, but they were saved by hearing the old cry of "Mil! Mil! Mil!"
And so it often happened.
At last an enemy died and carried his hatred of them to another world, whence he returned as a spirit to attack them. But again they were saved by the warning cry of "Mil! Mil! Mil!"
This cry they discovered was made by a little grey owl, with black rings round its eyes, which, having warned the camp, flew from it. The wundah, or evil spirit, saw it, and said: "Why do you warn them? Keep quiet next time I go to sneak upon them. See, I have my boondee; I will kill one of the tribe quickly, and you can join me in my feast of his flesh."
<pb n="98"/>The bird promised silence, and the wundah went again into the camp. But just as he was going to raise his boondee to deal a fatal blow, "Mil! Mil! Mil!" was cried in the sleeper's ear. The owl had followed the wundah into the camp.
"Why did you do that?" the wundah angrily asked.
"That I shall always do, even as when I was Eerin the man, for did not my tribe spill freely the blood offering? Shall I not then save them from the wundah even as I did from their old enemies? By day I shall rest, and at night I shall roam, hovering round their camps to guard them, by my cry, when danger threatens them."
And so it has been ever since. The spirit of Eerin the light sleeper is in the little grey owl, which is called Eerin too, and ever warns its old tribe at night by crying, "Mil! Mil! Mil!"
