NNA024575
There was a very large man. He had a big head, a protruding belly, and long feet. He had two wives. They had nothing to but ground grass-seed. They lived alone, where they saw no There was not even game to hunt. The man said to his wives, <pb n=281>"Let us go Eastward again. I am tired of eating this grass-seed. I am tired of seeing no tracks, and of seeing no game; therefore I wish to go East." The next day they moved away. Seeing a mountain, they went up it, then down the other side. They saw a spring and camped there, staying the next day. The man said, "Stay here. I will go on and hunt." 
He found the tracks of a man, a woman, and two children. Coming back he said, "I saw the tracks of four persons. I shall go and look for them; perhaps we shall see them living somewhere." Then he went with his wives to where he had seen the tracks. There they saw two antelopes. "Kill them. I am hungry," said one of the women to him. "No, they belong to him [they are his horses]," said the man. They followed the tracks and again camped at a spring. Then the man left the two women after saying to them, "I will go after that man and kill him. I want to eat him. I shall bring him back, and you also will like to eat him." Then he went, watching closely. He saw the man, and shot him. Then he shot the woman and choked the children. He returned to his women and said, "Let us go there. I have killed them all. We will go to butcher them." So they skinned the man and woman. Then he told one of his wives to skin the boy neatly and carefully. The meat they dried, hanging it up. They stayed there two days. The man ate all the meat. He ate the bones of the feet and everything else, throwing nothing away. Then he said, "Stay here; will travel about to see if I can find anything. I will take the skin of that boy with me." 
He ascended a mountain; he peered over the top, but saw nothing. Then he raised his head higher, and saw a tent, with two women and a man near it. He took the stuffed skin of the boy, held it up, and moved it about. The second time he did so, the man saw it, and said to the women, "A boy is up there. Did you see him? I will go up to him." The cannibal laid the stuffed skin down and hid in the bushes. The man came up and said to the boy, "Who are you? Get up. Can you not sit up?" The cannibal drew his bow and shot the man. He ran a short way, fell, and died. Then the cannibal went on another hill, and did the same there. He held the boy in front of a cedar and made him wave his hand. "Did you see that boy? He is over there," said a young man, who was with the women. He went up the hill. The cannibal laid the boy down, and shot this one, as he had shot the other. Thus he had killed two men. Then he showed the boy in another place; but the women did not come to him. "We will both stay here and wait until the men come," they said. Then the cannibal made a circuit to the other side of the tent. He approached it and again showed the skin. <pb n=282>One of the women saw the boy, and called to him, "Who are you? What tribe are you?" But the man only lowered the boy out of sight, and then made him appear to look again. But the women did not come to him; therefore he left the hide lying and approached the tent from another side. He came up to the women. "Where is your husband?" he asked. They said to him, "He went there after a boy. A young man also went away after that one and has not come back; perhaps the boy was only playing." Then he shot both of the women, one after the other. Taking the stuffed hide, he went back to his tent. He told his wives, "I have killed four pieces of game. Let us remove there." Then they went there and lived in that tent. He said to his women, "Skin this woman well and tan her hide; make it your dress. After three nights, I will go to hunt again." Then they skinned her. They tanned the skin; they made it stiff and crackling. One of them used it for a dress. The cannibal ate one of the men. He put the head into the fire to roast. "Gather the bones and get the marrow," he said. Soon the women were fat from eating grease and marrow. 
After the man had slept three times, he said, "I will kill another one for you now. You stay here and I will go hunting." Then he went away, taking the boy's skin. He saw an old man, a woman, and a girl. On the top of the hill, he showed them the boy. The old man said, "I see a boy there. I will go to see what kind of a boy is there." So he went up and was shot. Again the man showed the boy in another place. The old woman said, "Let us go to see who the boy is. Perhaps some one is living on the other side of the hill now." Then they both went there. The man put down the stuffed skin and hid behind some cedars. He shot both of the women. Then he went to their tent, but he found no one else there; he had killed all. He went home and told his women. They all went there. He said to them, "Skin this woman, and make a dress of her. I will skin this old man. I think I like his skin for my blanket." So they skinned them and dried the meat. "Now tan that skin," he said to one of the women. Then she made it stiff. Then he said, "Remain here. I will hunt again." 
Again he went, carrying the boy's skin. He went far and found no one. In the middle of the day he became tired. He went to a spring and drank, and lay down with the stuffed hide beside him. He slept. Two men came to drink. They found him with the stuffed skin of the boy. They spoke to each other, and knew that he was a bad man. They fled. Then he shot at them and killed one. The other one escaped. The cannibal went home and said, "I killed one at the spring; let us go there. One of them escaped." The women cried. "Why do you cry?" he asked. "They said, <pb n=283>"Because you let him escape. I want him." "Oh!" he said. "I will get him later." The other man fled. He said to the people, "I saw a bad person. He has a big belly, a big head, and big feet. I saw that he had the skin of a boy. He is bad." Then they removed to another camp and told those persons there. These also were afraid, and removed to another place. Thus all went away, being much afraid. Only in one camp there remained a young man and his mother. All the others fled. His mother said to him, "Let us flee, my son. He is a bad person; he will kill us." He said to her, "No, we will stay here. I want to talk to that one; I think he is my friend." His mother was much frightened, and continued to tell him to go away. After a while he said to her, "Now, mother, get water in a large basket." They lived on a slate hill. On the rock he made a small lake with the water that she brought. Ten times she brought him water, and he poured it in. Then he told his mother to grind a basketful of seeds and to cook them. She did this. She was much frightened. "I am afraid," she said. "I will run away." He said to her, "No, my mother, do not fear him. Let him come. He will not hurt you. Go and set fire to that cedar so that he will see the smoke, and come to visit us." The man saw it and told his wives. "Some one is over there. I saw smoke." They said to him, "Good, you will kill him." He said to them, will go there now; perhaps there are many people. I will stay there one night; perhaps I will kill ten. If I do not come back after night, you must come after me." 
Then he travelled fast. He went on a hill and peered over. The young man was looking for him and saw him. "Look, mother, there is that man," he said. "Oh, my son, I will run away," said she. Then the cannibal raised the stuffed skin. The young man cried out, "Why do you do that? Come here, you." So that one left the skin and went there. His mother said, "He is coming now. Let us run." "No," said the young man. She ran a short distance. He called to her, "Come back, my mother. Let him come. Give him this food." Then she came back to him, shaking. Now the cannibal arrived there. The young man went to him quickly and said, "Well, my friend," and took his hand. "Sit down there," said to him; and the man with the large belly sat down there. "Are you hungry?" he asked him. "Yes," he said. "What do wish? Do you want meat or something else?" he said to him. "Anything," said the man. "Very well. Do you like this food? It already cooked," said the young man. Then he gave him a basketful. That one drank it all. "Have you finished?" he asked man. He said, "No." Then he gave him another basketful. Again the man drank this off. The young man said to him, "Where do <pb n=284>you live? Where is your tent? What is your purpose in coming here?" The man said to him, "I live far away. I came here with no purpose." The young man said to him, "Stay here one night. We will talk together." But that one wished to go back home. The young man said, "Do you wish to urinate or defecate?" "No," said the man. "When you wish it, do so there," said the young man to him. After a little while the man said, "I am full now. I must defecate." The young man said to him, "Very well. Come. I made a lake over there by urinating." The cannibal said, "Where shall I urinate?" "Here," said the young man. Then he said, "I have a pretty eagle here on this cliff. Do you wish to see it?" Then the large-bellied one lay down and looked over the jutting cliff to see the eagle. The young man threw him down into the lake. He swam around and around. All about him the rock was steep. He could not get out. The young man watched him. Soon he began to be tired. He went down. Then he came up again; he was nearly dead. At last he drowned. 
The next day the young man stayed at home. He said to his mother, "Where is your rope? What did you do with it? I wish to pull that man out." "No. He is a bad man," she said to him. But he said, "Give me the rope. I will do what is good." She gave him the rope. He went down to the water and tied the legs and the hands of the man. Then he pulled him up. He butchered him, skinned him, and told his mother to dry the meat. "Why do you do this?" she said. He said to her, "I think his women will come. We will give them his meat to eat and go outside. We will watch what they do." Then he put the head under the fire in order to cook it. He laid down two large, fat pieces ready cooked. Then he went away behind a rock and watched. He saw two women come. They saw the meat hanging to dry, and saw the cooked meat lying there. They sat down and ate it greedily, laughing. One of them said to the other, "Perhaps my husband went to kill the others. He has already killed a fat one." Soon they had finished. One of them saw the head covered up in the fire. She said, "See the head. Let us eat it." Then they took it out. "I want part of it," said the other. Then they cut it in two. They ate it, laughing. One said, "My husband cooks well." Then one said, "I am sleepy." The other one said she was sleepy; so they went to sleep. The young man watched them. One began to sleep lightly. Then she awoke. She said, "Get up, my sister! My heart is bad, it hits me hard. I think I ate the flesh of my husband." The other one said, "Yes, I also feel bad. I do not know what is the trouble. I think the same as you think." Now they both cried. The young man had been watching them. Now he came and they saw him. <pb n=285> He said, "What is the matter with you? Why do you not eat this meat hanging here? Your husband has gone away hunting." They said to each other, "Perhaps he killed our husband." Then he said to them, "Yes, I killed your husband. He is a bad man. I will kill you also." "No, do not kill me," they said. "No, I will certainly kill you." "Do not kill me," they said. Again he said, "No, I will kill you." Then he shot them. He killed them both. He said, "That one has killed many persons, but now he is gone. He is killed. People will not do thus any more. They will be friends and will not eat each other. That one was insane." 
