NNA026123
<note>See RBAE 31 : 781 (Kaigani, Skidegate, Tlingit).</note> 
A family lived in a large, long village in the Hūtcᴇnūʼ<note>A division of the Tlingit (Hutsnuwu, 'bear-fort').</note> country. It consisted of husband, wife, and some children. The wife feigned sickness when her husband was at home. Whenever her husband was away, her lover came and staid with her. She said to her band, "I have been sick a long time now; I am going to die soon." Later she said to him, "I am going to die to-night. Do not burn my body, but put it on top of the ground in a house of poles."<note>Some of the people in Hutsnuwu are said to have disposed of their dead in this manner.</note> She had already put rotten clams underneath her body. The people buried her as she had directed, and her husband went to the grave and cried for his dead wife. She was not there, however, for she had departed the first night after the pole-house had been erected over her.<note>Compare RBAE 31 : 781.</note> She went off with her lover, and was living with him in the farthest house at the end of the village. Some time afterwards one of her sons, who was a big boy, happened to go to this house. He was surprised to see his mother there. She never spoke to him, and feigned not to know him. When he came home, he told his father, who said, "You must be mistaken. You know that your mother is dead. The woman you saw may have a face resembling that of your mother, but it cannot be that she is alive." The boy went back to the house and had a good look. He came back, and told his father he was sure it was his mother. His father then went, and, looking through a crack in the house, recognized his wife. He went home, and said to himself, "I wish I could do something to kill them! " He tried to bewitch them with every kind of thing, including dead people's bones, but did not succeed. Then he tried the bone of a dead dog. When he put <pb n="244"/>this bone on his body, he began to shiver as shamans do when their spirits come into them. He kept on working with the dog-bone and dog-spirit until at last he was able to fly. Now he made two arrows<note>Some people say that he took two hard-wood sticks and sharpened the points.</note> of hard wood, and, flying the whole length of the village, he caused everybody to fall asleep. He went to the place where his wife and her lover were, and pushed an arrow into his wife's rectum, thus killing her. He killed her lover in the same manner. When the people woke up, they said, " Why have we slept so late this morning? " They wondered why the woman and man did not get up. They examined them, and found them stiff and dead, with arrows sticking in them. They prepared the bodies for cremation, and wondered how they had been killed. Now the husband dressed up in his best clothes. He seemed very happy, and went around laughing, and challenging people to play the stick-game. When he played, he always won. The people noticed that when he played, he always joked and called the trump toq qᴇtz, which means "anus root-digger." This and his changed demeanor made the people think that he was the murderer of the woman and her lover; but they said nothing about it at that time, as they did not know of witchcraft. Afterwards all the people of that place became famous as witches, and witchcraft spread from them to other tribes. In this way witchcraft was introduced. 
