NNA024561
A man was hunting. He went on a flat-topped hill. Looking into the valley below, he saw two young Deer running away from him. When they were on the side of the hill opposite, they stopped, and looking back said to him, "Do not shoot us. Stop! we will tell you something." "Very well," he said. Then they came towards him. When they reached him they said, "We will tell you something." He asked, "What will you tell me?" In this way they spoke to each other several times, the man asking, "What will you tell me?" and the Deer answering, "We will tell you something." At last he said, "Well, tell it to me." One of the Deer said, "I was about to tell you that there is some one on the other side of that ridge that you see; there are two women there. As soon as you climb the ridge you will see a small lake. At the end of this stands a cedar, and near it a young cedar. Dig under the small tree, hide there, and watch the lake. As you lie in hiding under the small tree, you will see a bird come. It will sit in the tree. When it alights on the ground, it will be a woman, who is pretty, and wears a light red dress. This first bird is not a good bird. The woman will go into the lake to take a swim. Do not touch her. Let her put on her clothes again and fly off. Then another bird will come, and it will be a good one. When she is in the water, show yourself. Take her clothes, roll them in a bunch, and clasp and lie upon them. When she comes out of the water and asks for her clothes, do not let her have them at once; do not give them to her until she says, "I will marry you and we will go away together." If you give them to her before she has said this, she will fly off very quickly. You will hardly see her." 
The man went off and did as he had been told. He allowed the first woman, though she was good looking, to become a bird again. She sat in the tree a while, and then flew off. Then a blue bird came and sat on the same tree. When it touched the ground, it was a fine looking woman, dressed in blue. Taking off all her clothes, she swam in the water. When she came out, she asked him to give her her clothes. Finally she said, "If you give me my clothes, I will marry you." "Truly?" he asked. "Indeed," she said, "it is the truth. I will marry you and we will go away together." Then she told him to go a little distance off while she was dressing. When she was dressed, she called him, and they went off. When they had gone a little way from the lake, she said, "Let us lie down here." Then she asked him, "Who are you? To what tribe do you belong?" <pb n=278>He said, "Who are you!" She said, "Did you not see me? I have wings. If you will tell me who you are, we will be married. We will have a boy, then a girl, then a boy, and so on. I have been all over the world, but I have seen no tribes like you, nor animals like you." It was because he wore trousers that she asked him what he was. She intended, if she liked his people, when he told her, that they should stay there for the night. The sun went down, and it was a little before night. She began to ask him again, "What tribe are you? To whom do you belong?" Then he said, "I am Kokvä'tc" [Mexican]. "What do you mean?" she said. "I never heard that word. What do you mean with Kokvä'tc?" She could not understand him. She asked him, "From what direction are you?" He pointed to the East. Then she did not like him. She thought that after he was asleep, she would leave him; and she resolved never to be a woman again, but to remain a bird. They slept together without a blanket. The man slept soundly, and in the morning got up alone. No one was with him. He went to the lake again, thinking that she would come back there. He stayed there five days, but no one came. Then he went back to find the two Deer. He saw their tracks, which had become very faint. He followed the tracks very far for a long time, thinking that the Deer might tell him more. But at last he stopped, without having overtaken them, and went back home. 
