NNA026109
<pb n="247"/><note>See BBAE 59 : 309 and pp. 269, 308, of this number. </note>
Two adolescent sisters who were living together were staying apart from the other people. One evening when about to retire, they were playing and joking with each other. Happening to look up at the stars, one of them said, "Do you see that nice star? That is my husband. I wish he would come here and take me! " The other sister looked around among the stars, and picked out one which seemed very beautiful. She said, "That one is my husband. I wish he would come for me! " Soon after this the girls fell asleep. In the morning they found themselves in the sky. The stars they had chosen had taken them up during the night. They lived with these men as their husbands. The star men were great hunters, and always killed an abundance of game. The women had to carry home all the meat and skins. After a while they discovered a hole in the sky, and they used to watch the people moving on the earth below. They thought by what means they might be able to descend to earth, and, according to the elder sister's suggestion, they secretly cut up skins and made a long rope. They told their husbands that some animal was eating the skins. When they thought the rope was long enough, the elder sister said, "I will go down first. If you feel me shake the rope, you will know that I have reached the ground. If I do not shake it, and all the rope is out, you will know that it is too short, and you must pull me up again. If you follow me, tie the end of the rope to the cross-stick over the hole, pull it up, and come down yourself." Their husbands were out hunting. Both sisters reached the earth in safety. The rope was not quite long enough, but they alighted on top of a tall tree. 
The younger woman had just got clear of the rope when the star men arrived, and, finding that their wives had descended, cut the upper end of the rope, which fell down and lopped off all the side- branches of the tree. The women could not descend, and sat in the top of the tree, where a few branches were left. They called for help on the various animals that passed near the tree; but some passed without paying any heed, and others promised to help on their return. At last Wolverene came along, and they called to him. He said to them, "Yes, I can carry you down." He climbed the tree and began to play with the girls. The elder girl said to her sister, " Keep him off until after he has carried us down." She said to Wolverene, "You must carry us down first." He carried the elder one down, and wanted to play with her, but she would not let him until he had carried down her sister. When he came to her, he wanted to do likewise; but she said, "You must carry me down first." When he brought her down, <pb n="248"/>he asked for his reward; and the sisters said, "We are hungry; you must get us meat first." He brought the meat, and asked them again. They said, "Let us eat first." When they had finished, he asked again; and they said, "We are thirsty; bring us water first." Wolverene was now getting tired, but he brought the water. They said to him, "Take us up to the top of yonder steep bluff, and then we shall really give you what you want." He took them there, and the women prepared a bed to sleep in. Wolverene wanted to sleep farthest from the steep bluff, but they made him take the place over the precipice. He lay down next to the younger sister, and immediately the elder one pushed him off. He fell over the cliff and was killed. Now the sisters left, and looked for the camp of their people. One night Bush-Tailed Rat entered their camp and killed and ate one of them. The other escaped and reached the people, who had given the women up for dead. The surviving sister told the people of her adventures and how the stars were fine-looking people. 
Because of this story the Indians believe that it is dangerous to wish for the stars; for they may come and take you away, as they did the sisters in the story. Because Wolverene carried these women on his back, the wolverene at the present day can carry meat on his back. 
