NNA025248
Big-Raven [Tsᴇ'sketco<note>Tsᴇ'sketco or tcᴇski'tco, 'big raven' (from tcᴇski'a, 'raven'). When speaking. English, the Tahltan generally call the Raven Transformer 'Big-Crow.'</note>] is said to have been born far north in the Tlingit country. Some informants claim that he was of miraculous birth, but the common story is that he was the youngest of many brothers. He never saw his father, and no one knows who his father was. Raven always talked the Tlingit language. He was quite young when he began travelling as a transformer. He followed along the seashore in a small canoe, alone, stopping here and there where people lived. In his day people lived in small groups, sometimes widely separated, and under varying conditions according to locality. They differed from one another in their customs <pb n="199"/>and in their methods of making a living. They were nearly all semi-animal, and possessed of various kinds of power and knowledge. Some of them used their powers for evil or to the disadvantage of others. These people Raven had to kill to deprive them of their power. Some groups of people had knowledge that others did not possess. This knowledge was the remains or fragments of the [general] knowledge possessed by all people before the Flood.<note>See p. 232.</note> The knowledge of one thing was retained by one group of people, and of another thing by another group. Raven made this knowledge the common property of all people by obtaining possession himself and then giving it away to others. He allowed nothing that was of value to mankind to remain the sole property of any particular family or group. 
Raven travelled from north to south throughout the Tlingit country. The Tlingit at that time extended along the coast a long way north and south, farther than in historic times. Raven went beyond the Tlingit to the south, and is said to have turned back from the country of the Mink people.<note>Possibly the people who have Mink as one of the heroes of their myths, the Kwakiutl and Coast Salish.</note> The latter people, therefore, must have had a different transformer. Raven came back up the coast again, and finished many details of his work to which he had not attended on his way south. Either on the way south or north he is said to have visited the Haida. He worked a long time on the coast. When he had finished on the coast, he ascended the rivers into the interior. He went up the Stikine to its head waters, and it is said he also went up the Nass, Skeena, and Taku Rivers, and all the principal streams. He was tired when he reached the interior, and did not do much work there or stay long. It seems he lost much of his power towards the end. He ascended one river after another, and did not cross the country between them. He always kept close to the main streams. He never travelled beyond the sources of any of the rivers, and therefore he did very little work among the Kaska and other interior Indians to the east.<note>The principal transformer of the Kaska appears to have been Beaver (see Teit, JAFL 30 : 429).</note> 
When Raven's work was finished, he travelled out to sea towards the setting sun, and disappeared. No one knows where he went, or where he is now if alive; but some people believe he lives now with Kanu'gu<note>See pp. 201, 212</note> and other great gods or chiefs of the ancients, on an island or country away out in the ocean, where the weather is made. 
