NNA026031
Now Raven thought of the people, how they died one at a time now and then, and that no children were born. They did not know how children originated. He thought that by and by there would be no people. He came to a village of Woodchuck people, and he began to play with the girl. When shame took hold of her, she fled. She was afraid, for no one had ever done this before. He thought, "I will make this girl sick." Soon afterwards her leg swelled. He asked her if she was sick; and she showed him her leg, which was swollen. He told her, "I know <pb n="207"/>medicine that will cure that quickly." He told her: "Go out a short distance from the village and whistle. When you hear an answering whistle, go to where the sound came from, and you will see something sticking out of the ground. Sit on it and let it into your vagina, and then you will at once become well." Raven went to the outskirts of the village, and, covering himself with moss, he lay on his back with his penis protruding. Thither came the maiden, following his counsels, and sat down upon the penis. When he had completely entered, the raven overthrew the maiden, and copulated with her. Thus the raven decreed that humans shall be copulating, the male with the female, and children would result from the union and be born by the woman.<note>See RBAE 31 : 569, No. 41 (Bellabella, Bellacoola, Chilcotin, Comox, Haida, Kwakiutl, Newettee, Nootka, Rivers Inlet).</note> Raven, however, forgot to tell the people not to be afraid when a woman should become pregnant, and that children would come naturally at the right time without any aid. After he had gone, the woman began to grow stout, for she was pregnant. After nine months, she thought she would burst. The people were afraid, cut her abdomen, and extracted the child. Subsequently the cut healed. Afterwards they did the same with other women. Finally, however, a woman would not allow the people to operate on her. She had been cut once, and she had been sick a long time from the effects; so she said that she would rather die than be cut again. After nine months she gave birth to a child. From that time on, the people did not cut any more women.<note>See RBAE 31 : 609, No. 70 (Chilcotin, Lillooet, Shuswap, Thompson); see also Teit, MAFLS 2 : 4 (Thompson).</note> 
Raven now ordained that people should die and be born. One generation would die off and be followed by another, and so there would always be people. Had he said people would only be born, and not die, then people would always live, and now there would be very many people on the earth. Had none died and none been born, then there would always have been just the original people in the world. 
Raven now divided the people into exogamic phratries. He put half the people on his right side, and half on his left. The former he called Kātceʼde; and the latter, Tāxtloweʼde.<note>Kātceʼde is the name of the Raven phratry among the Tahltan. It is said by some to be derived from the name of a place in the Tlingit country called Kātc, meaning 'cedar-bark;' and by others, from the Tlingit ka, signifying 'man' or 'people.' Tāxtloweʼde is the name of the Wolf phratry of the Tahltan, and is said to be derived from a Tlingit word meaning 'back sand' or 'sandy place back in the interior.'</note> He said that the right-hand people, or Ravens, should always marry the left-hand people, or Wolves. It would not be well to marry otherwise. After this the people had the two phratries of Raven and Wolf. 
