NNA026087
<note>See Kaska (Teit JAFL 30 : 215).</note> 
Wolverene was married to a woman. Her two brothers and her mother lived near them. When the brothers killed game, Wolverene used to go back at night to the place and cache all the meat in a hidden spot for himself. He was a great thief. When the people went to carry in their meat the next day, they found nothing there. On this account they were reduced to starvation. The brothers suspected Wolverene. They killed a moose, and cached all the meat themselves excepting a little that they packed home. That night Wolverene and his wife heard the breaking of bones in the other lodges, as if the people were extracting marrow. He said to his wife, "They are breaking fresh bones." He sent his wife to see. She questioned her mother, who answered, "How could we have marrow-bones? I was just breaking up a bone skin-scraper to make soup. Your brothers are starving." Wolverene knew better, however, and went out and found their cache. He urinated and defecated on all the meat, and made it unfit to eat. The brothers said, "We shall beat him." They went out hunting, and killed a young fat moose. Wolverene was also hunting near by; so they called him, saying, "Brother-in-law, will you help us pack some meat home?" He came. They had lighted a fire near the carcass, and were cooking the web of fat from the inside of the moose. They said to Wolverene, "Sit down on the other side of the fire. The fat will be cooked soon. We shall eat something before we carry the meat to camp." Wolverene was sitting warming himself, and had his knees outspread in front of the fire. One of the brothers took the cooking-stick with the hot fat on the end of it, and threw the fat against Wolverene's privates, burning him. He scratched the sore place; and while he was thus engaged, they clubbed him. He managed to get away, and as he ran he kept scratching at the sore spot. The brothers chased him, and kept hitting him on the rump. Wolverene reached some smooth ice, and got away from them. Because the wolverene's rump-bone was broken, he has a halting gait at the present day. Because he was burnt, the hair of his loins is reddish, and he has a burnt smell. Wolverene's privates were much too sore to have connection with women. He took to the woods, and never lived with people again. 
