NNA024566
Coyote went from his village down a narrow canyon. The canyon widened into an open place, in which there stood one tent. The Hummingbird lived there with his wife and two children. "Where are you going?" he asked Coyote, after the latter had stayed overnight with him. Coyote said, "I will continue to go along this canyon. I do not know how far it extends, but I am going along it." The Hummingbird said, "Where you mean to go there is no water. There is nothing in this canyon. Only after you travel a long way will you come to water. You can follow the ridge of this mountain; from the top you can see far, almost over the whole world; that is the nearest way to reach water." Coyote said, "No, I am going through this canyon; when night comes I shall sleep without drinking. Next day I will go on, go on, go on. At night I will sleep again." The Hummingbird answered, <pb n=261>"The way that I told you of is the best; you had better take the way I tell you. You cannot do without water. You will die before half a day. You must not try to be superior to me, but follow what I tell you." The Hummingbird's wife said to him, "Do not talk to him any longer. He will not do what you tell him. You have talked to him enough." The Hummingbird said, "Yes; let him go where he wishes." Then he said to Coyote, "Yes, go where you wish." 
Before Coyote started, the Hummingbird said to him, "After a distance you will find a red blanket lying on a large rock to your side; there will be another blanket on the other side, and your path will go right between them. There will also be blankets of green, blue, and other colors lying on both sides of the road. Do not take any of them." Coyote started and travelled quickly. He reached the place of the blankets. It was near a rock; a trail ran by there. He saw a good, new, red blanket; he stopped and thought about it. He wondered to whom it might belong. "Some one must live here," he thought, and he wondered where. Then he went near the blanket; he touched its edge, and felt that it was a fine heavy blanket. "Some one must live near this place. I will search for his tracks about here," he said. He made a circle around the blanket at a distance, but found no tracks. Then he thought again, "I will look for tracks farther away." Again he made a circle around it, but saw nothing. Then he came back and stood by the blanket, and he thought, "To whom does it belong? I might get one of these blankets for myself. Which is the best one to have?" He thought especially of the red blankets, and took one of these. He put it about himself, and considered it just right. Then he rolled it up and threw it over his shoulder and walked off among the rocks. He went a little way; then he looked back to see if any one was coming after him; he saw no one. He came out of the canyon and went over a plain where there were no mountains visible. At first he had walked watching, looking behind, but when he was in the open plain, he no longer thought about watching. At last he looked back and saw much dust coming from the canyon, as if there were a whirlwind. He went to a somewhat elevated spot and looked. He saw a large rock. It was immense. It was the one on which the blanket had been, and it was rolling along. Coyote did not know what to do. He saw the rock going up a slope. It slowed. It nearly stopped. He thought that it would not continue to go on, and would not reach him; therefore, he delayed to watch it. It came very near him. 
Now Coyote was much frightened. He put the blanket over his shoulder and ran along a little ridge, as hard as he could. After <pb n=262>some distance he saw that the rock had reached the top of the elevation on which he had been, and that it was coming with a fresh start, as fast as when he first saw it, rolling its hardest. He was afraid to continue running in the plain, and seeing a mountain, he ran towards it in hope to reach it. He remained in the lead, and the rock stopped gaining on him. Coyote continued to run as hard as he could. Now he was near the mountain. At its foot he had nearly given out. He looked back and the rock was close. The was steep; going up, he sat on the summit and watched the rock. His body was shaking with panting; he was nearly dead. thought that the rock could not roll up the hill, but would fall back. It kept coming on slowly; then it went up the hill sideways. would stop and sit still, then go on again, then turn and go up in other direction. It came nearer, hardly moving. It lay still. Then it rolled over once. Coyote sat on the summit and thought, think I can push it down again; I think I can make it roll back." So he ran towards it. But when he got close to it, the rock began to roll towards him; when it nearly touched him, he dodged aside. The rock just touched his leg. Coyote gave a war-whoop and dodged about. The rock started to roll faster in pursuit. Then Coyote went off straight, running his hardest. At the foot of the hill he looked back, and saw the rock coming fast. Now he no longer had a mountain to go to; everything was flat. He went to a small canyon and jumped across it; he thought that the rock would in. He stopped and looked back; but he could not see the rock. He only saw much dust coming from the canyon below him. Then he went on slowly. Looking again, he saw nothing but dust. Then he saw a small, pointed, rocky hill, and thought that from there might look back and see the rock. 
He ran to the hill, but the canyon stretched toward the hill, and before Coyote reached it he saw the rock ahead of him in the canyon. Then he started back again. He was all tired out. He could hardly lope. As he ran along he thought, "Where is my friend the Deer living?" Then he saw the Deer standing at the place where he generally lived, and he said to the Deer, "Come! Hurry! This rock pursues me. You can do something for me." "Yes, come this way," said the Deer, and they loped along together as if they were racing. "This rock is after me. It will kill me," said Coyote. "Yes," said the Deer. "I think you will hold it, you will push it back," said Coyote. The Deer said, "Yes, very well, my friend, watch me, look at me." The Deer turned and ran towards the rock; with full power he struck it at its bottom. The rock went straight over him, crushing him to pieces. "My poor friend," thought Coyote. "Now he is killed by that rock. What shall I do?" 
<pb n=263>He continued to go on, still carrying the blanket on his shoulder. He thought of the Mountain-Sheep as his friend, just as of the Deer before. As he ran on he saw a fresh Mountain-Sheep track. He followed it as if he were hunting. Then he saw the Mountain-Sheep sitting [i. e. lying down]. "Well, my friend, hurry! This rock pursues me," he said. "Very well, come with me," said the Mountain-Sheep. Then they loped along together as if they were racing, just as he had done with the Deer. As they ran, Coyote told the Mountain-Sheep of his plight: "My friend, I wish you to stop this rock. I am exhausted. I think it will kill me. I want you to strike it with your horn, and break it." The Sheep did not answer. "Thrust your horn against it and break it," said Coyote. The Mountain-Sheep asked, "What caused the rock to come after you? You must have done something to it; it would not pursue you for nothing. Where did you get that blanket?" Coyote did not speak. "The rock is never going to stop; it will kill you. You took that blanket from it," said the Mountain-Sheep. Coyote said to him, "If you stop the rock you can have the blanket." The Mountain-Sheep said, "Only throw the blanket away and the rock will stop there, lying upon it." Coyote would not give it up; and he said, "I like this red blanket very much. I like to have it; that is why the rock pursues me. I knew you were strong. You can do almost anything. I want you to stop this rock." They ran up a hill. "Now I will attack it. My friend, watch me," said the Sheep. The rock had come close again. The Mountain-Sheep prepared. Then he ran back, stood up on his hind legs, and butted the rock squarely. The rock always rolled faster when anything opposed it; it came on now and tore the Sheep all to pieces. Coyote thought, "My poor friend! What will I do now? What friend will I find again?" 
He went down a wide valley and found the Whip-Poor-Will; he told him his trouble. The Whip-Poor-Will said: "I can do nothing, go to the Bull-Bat." Coyote ran to the Bull-Bat. "Hurry, my friend!" he said. He told the Bull-Bat what he had told the Deer. Coyote was very nearly exhausted, and the rock was near. The Bull-Bat flew back and forth between Coyote and the rock. The Bull-Bat said, "You have a blanket belonging to this rock. Why are you carrying that? My friend, you have no place to save yourself; the rock will kill you. It will go all over the world, night and day, without stopping [until it reaches you]. Why do you carry this blanket? You cannot escape with it. You cannot escape from this rock if you cross a river. The rock will jump over. You cannot hide from this rock. Throw the blanket away, and the rock will stop right upon it." "No, I like it," said Coyote, "I <pb n=264>like its color, and I will go all over the world using it. How can I stop the rock, my friend? What can I do?" "Throw the blanket away," said the Bull-Bat. Coyote said to him, "No, I will wear it. I will travel all over the world with it, after you have stopped the rock." The Bull-Bat said, "No, I cannot stop it; the rock will kill me. Then what will you do after it has killed me? It will kill us both; rather throw the blanket away. Do you think this rock is merely a rock without thought? It has thought, eyes, a mouth, it can talk, and it has a heart; it rolls of itself like a person; a rock does not roll by itself." During this time they were running. "Stop it! I want this blanket," Coyote said at last. "Very well, my friend. I think the rock will kill me," said the Bull-Bat. The Bull Bat flew ahead of Coyote; then he flew towards the rock, swerving in front of it. He just did not touch it. The rock slackened somewhat; then it began to roll faster again. Again the Bull-Bat made it slacken. The third time he flew straight at it; and with the whir of his wings he struck the spirit of the rock. The rock stopped altogether. It groaned, shook the earth, and quivered like a dying animal; then it died. Coyote, altogether worn out, watched it. When he saw it die, he fell over from exhaustion. 
The Bull-Bat was near the rock, while Coyote lay some distance away. The Bull-Bat said, "Now you will be a rock forever. You will pursue no one." Then he went to Coyote to see how he was. Coyote said, "I am very sick. I shall die soon. My thighs are altogether stiff. I also feel bad in my throat. I shall die." The Bull-Bat said to him, "No, that only means that you have been running too much. When you go on again you will get over that." Coyote said, "Yes." Then Coyote told the Bull-Bat what had happened. He told him how the Deer had been killed, and, the second time, the Mountain-Sheep also. The Bull-Bat said to him, "Have you no sense? You killed them. If you had thrown away the blanket, they would not have died. Every one knows who owned the blanket. Only you, I think, did not know it. Now I am going to where I live. You can go where you please. I hope you have a home." "Yes," said Coyote, "I will go where I please." 
