NNA019504
Then Thrush-Woman invited [the myth people to a feast]. [Ō′ᵋmāł] tribe entered. Then she pushed [a feather] into her anus, and excrements came out. They were salmon-berries. Then she put them into a dish and placed them before her guests Then they went out. Then it was Ō′ᵋmāł's [turn]. "Invite, invite, invite, invite for this Ō′ᵋmāł!" said Canoe-Calking [Raven]. The tribe of Ō′ᵋmāł came in. Then Ō′ᵋmāł put [a feather] in his backside. Then he made a mess with what was really excrements. He was just trampled upon by his tribe, and they went out. 
Then Young-Seal [Sleeping-Eye-Woman] invited [the myth people to a feast]. Young-Seal washed her hands, <pb n="239"/>and she warmed her hands. Then fat dripped out of them into a dish, and that dish was filled. Then she placed it before her guests, and her tribe ate. They went out. Then it was Ō′ᵋmāł's [turn]. "Invite, invite, invite, invite for this Ō′ᵋmāł!" said Canoe-Calking. The myth people entered. Then Ō′ᵋmāł washed his hands, and warmed them by the fire. Ō′ᵋmāł's hands just shrivelled up. Then he was trampled upon, and his tribe went out. 
Then "Invite, invite, invite for this Kingfisher-made-to-go-up." The myth people entered, and she speared spring-salmon. Then she steamed the spring-salmon on stones. Then Ō′ᵋmāł arose, and he sent for his bird-head mask and his dancing-apron to be brought. "Go on, sing for me, that I may dance!" said Ō′ᵋmāł. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł! Go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł!" Then his feet sank into the ground. Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł! Go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł!" Then his body sank, and only his head was on the floor. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł! Go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł!" Then his head sank, and only his bird-head mask stood on the floor. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ō′ᵋmāł!" Then his bird-head mask sank, and he staid for a long time below. Then he made [the myth people] impatient. "Our elder brother has fooled us many times with what he cooks," said his tribe. Then they looked into the steaming-hole. What should there be! Behold! the bird-headdress was there. He had gone to what had been cooking. Then he was trampled upon by his tribe, and they went out. Invite, invite, invite for this Ō′ᵋmāł!" They entered. Then he speared a salmon. He fell into the water, and he was just pulled ashore by his younger brothers when he was drifting down the river on his back. 
"Invite, invite, invite for this Squirrel-made-to-go-up!" <pb n="241"/>They entered. Then Ō′ᵋmāł was lazy. They tried to call him again. "What is the matter with him?" said Ō′ᵋmāł. "Maybe you who called us have only gum eyes." Then Ō′ᵋmāł was told, "Squirrel-made-to-go-up invites to a great feast." Thus Ō′ᵋmāł was told. "What is it?" said Ō′ᵋmāł. "It is [?]." Then Ō′ᵋmāł sent for Canoe-Calking. "Lead this Ō′ᵋmāł!" Thus said Canoe-Calking. Nobody answered him. "I don't receive an answer," said Canoe-Calking. Then he said, "Ts!ᴇ′nts!ᴇnqaʟaxs." He stood up at the end of the fireplace, and Ts!ᴇ′nts!ᴇnqaʟaxs said, "Lead Ō′ᵋmāł!" Thus said Ts!ᴇ′nts!ᴇnqaʟaxs. Nobody answered him. Then Squirrel- made-to-go-up spoke. "Let this ugly one come and put his mouth to this knot-hole." Thus said Squirrel-made-to-go-up. Then Ō′ᵋmāł started, and went to put his mouth to the knot-hole. Then red-hot stones were taken up with tongs. They were wrapped around with [?] and put into Ō′ᵋmāł's mouth. "Qwā, qwā, qwā, qwāx!" said Ō′ᵋmāł. His mouth was burned. 
