NNA019479
<note>See Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. X, pp. 196 et seq.</note>
He arrived at Gwā′ᵋnālālis. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ pretended to be an old man. He sat down by a water. "Wash, wash, child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis!" [he thought]. Then the children of Gwā′ᵋnālālis came. They were four girls. They saw Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. Then one of the children of Gwā′ᵋnālālis said, "A nice little one is sitting on the beach. He shall be my slave." Thus said the oldest child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis. She took water and washed herself. Then she called Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. "Come, wash my back," said the oldest child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ washed the back of the girl. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ took gum and put it on his first-finger. Then he touched with his first-finger the womb of the child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis. He touched three of them from behind with his finger, but he did not want to touch the one. "Why is this one so daring? Do I know where you come from?" - "You will have her for your wife," said Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ [referring] to the youngest child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis . Then he married the child of Gwā′ᵋnālālis.<note>"That means I will have you for my wife," thought Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ in regard to the youngest daughter of Gwā′ᵋnālālis.</note> Then the older sisters of the wife of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ became pregnant. Then the wife of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ became pregnant, and she had a child. 
<pb n="197"/>Then Gwā′ᵋnālālis spoke. "Let us go and split boards." Thus said Gwā′ᵋnālālis. Then they paddled. They saw what was to be split. Then Gwā′ᵋnālālis drove in wedges, and the cedar-tree opened. Then the hammer dropped. It fell into the cedar-tree. "Come get our hammer. It dropped in," [said Gwā′ᵋnālālis]. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ took the hammer. Gwā′ᵋnālālis knocked out [the spreading sticks. The tree] clapped together, and blood came out, and Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ was dead. Then he saw the blood of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. He took the wedge and put it into the wedge-bag. "Serves you right! You came to make me ashamed." Gwā′ᵋnālālis started, carrying his wedge-bag. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ, came, carrying the hammer. "Why are you going away?" said Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. Gwā′ᵋnālālis said, "Come, let us go and do our work!" Gwā′ᵋnālālis came and began to drive in his wedges. Then the cedar tree opened. It was spread out. Then the hammer dropped in. "Come get it! My hammer dropped in." Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ went into the cedar and got it, and Gwā′ᵋnālālis knocked out the spreading-stick of the cedar tree. It clapped together, and blood came out. "Serves you right! You came to make me ashamed. You did not see what I was going to do to you." Gwâ′?nâlâlis started. "Don't go away!" said Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. "I am bringing your hammer." - "Oh, that is good, my dear!" said Gwā′ᵋnālālis. "I thought you were dead." Then they finished their work and paddled home. 
Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ threw rotten wood into the water. Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ said to the rotten wood, "You shall become dolphins." Then the rotten wood began to jump and became dolphins. They came and jumped at the head of Gwā′ᵋnālālis. Then his face began to swell. His eyes could not be seen because he was swollen. That was done by the dolphins. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ took salmon <pb n="199"/>berries, and put the berries into a bucket. Then he paddled, going home. He took the salmon-berries and gave them to his mother-in-law [his parent-in-law; namely, his woman parent-in-law] to eat. Then Gwā′ᵋnālālis was hurt. 
Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ lay down in the house. "Why are you downhearted?" said the wife of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ; and Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ spoke, and said, "The reason that I am downhearted is that Only-One is probably dead." Thus said Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. Then Gwā′ᵋnālālis spoke. "Go and see him," Gwā′ᵋnālālis said to his child, "only take your chamber-vessel." Thus said Gwā′ᵋnālālis to his child, the wife of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ. Then he started to see his younger brother. Now Only-One was dead. Then Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ cried on account of his younger brother, when he was dead. The flesh of Only-One was all gone. There were only bones. Then the wife of Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ took her chamber-vessel and sprinkled Only-One. He came to life. "Hë!" said Only-One, "I have been asleep for a long time." Thus said Only-One. "You did not sleep," said Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ to his younger brother Only-One, "you were dead." 
Then Lord Q!ā′nēqīᵋlax̣ᵘ spoke. I am going to start again. I have seen much that is wrong, that I will set right." <epimyth>That is the end.</epimyth> 
