NNA026073
At one time there was a young man in the Tlingit country who was very poor and lived with his mother. His father was still alive. His uncle's house was rotten and almost falling down, but he was so poor that he had no means of having it rebuilt. He had no friends. He was very sorry because of his poverty, and cried much. 
One day he saw a little toad, which came and played with him. That night about midnight, when he was asleep, a woman came to his bed and told him to get up. He awoke, and she asked him to come out. He went out with her, not knowing where he was going. At last they came to the door of a strange house, and entered. This was the dwelling of the Toads. Little-Toad came in, for these people were her relatives. The lad was asked for which reason he was playing with his aunt, and then the people tied him up by the legs. Little-Toad said, "That man will be killed when uncle comes home." 
Then they heard the sound of a canoe coming; and some said, "Uncle is coming." He was the Toad chief. The man came in and sat down in his place. He saw the lad hanging by the legs. He asked the people, "Why is that man hanging by the legs?" The Toad mother answered, "He played with the girl." There were many Toad people there. The chief asked the people, "What is this man?" and they answered, "He is a Wolf." The chief then asked the lad himself what he was; and he answered, "Wolf." The chief said, "Well, we marry Wolves; there is nothing wrong about that." He took the lad down, and made him sit down in a good, clean place. Then he brought the little Toad girl and seated her alongside the lad, saying, "Now you are married." Now he brought a great pile of <pb n="238"/>property of all kinds, and placed it beside them as a present. The lad thought, "How am I going to transport all these things?" The Toad chief heard his thoughts, and therefore gave him a very large canoe. He said, "I know you have been sorrowful for a long time about your uncle's house. Now you can manage to build a house." He went off with his wife and the property in the canoe, and reached his own place. He had a great amount of wealth now, and gave a great potlatch, and rebuilt his uncle's house. The people asked his wife what she was; and she answered, "Ka聞tcede."<note>Raven phratry of the Tahltan. There is also a Katce聞de clan of the Tahltan, descendants of people who went to the coast, lived there for a time, and then came back again (see Emmons, Tahltan Indians, 16, 17). It seems that these people claim relationship with the Ki聞ksede and Ka聞tcede clans of the Tlingit, who have the Toad as a crest. - J. A. TEIT. - See Swanton (BBAE 39 : 232); Kaigani (JE 5 : 260); Masset (JE 10: 557); Boas (RBAE 31 : 761).</note> After this her descendants had the crest of the Toad, and used it. 
