NNA026072
<pb n="235"/><note>A clan of the Wolf phratry among both the Tlingit and Tahltan. The Tahltan Nanaaʹi are a branch of the Tlingit clan of the same name. - See Kaska (JAFL 30 : 451); RBAE 31 : 818 (Haida, Rivers Inlet, Tlingit, Tsimshian).</note> 
A Tagish man of the Wolf phratry went to Kake Island in the Tlingit country, and married there. Near the place where he lived was a rock which was submerged when the flood-tides were very high. It had steep sides, which became very icy in the winter; and no one could climb up to the top of this rock. A sea-lion was often seen lying on the top of the rock, and the people always wondered how he got there. The people talked about this impossible feat of climbing the rock, and the Tagish man said he thought he could accomplish it. He was used to climbing steep mountains, unlike the Tlingit of the coast. His brothers-in-law laughed at his claim that he could climb the rock; and this resulted in hot words, and a declaration by the Tagish man that he would try the feat. 
He had four brothers-in-law, one of whom was friendly to him while the others were antagonistic. The Tagish man made snow-shoes and put ice-creepers of goat's-horn on them. His brothers-in-law took him off to the rock in a canoe. When they were alongside, he sprang out on the ice and ascended to the top without much difficulty. His brothers-in-law were angry because he had accomplished the feat, and said, "Let him stay there!" One brother wanted to take him off; but the others refused, and they left him to perish. 
The Tagish man covered himself with a bark blanket and some grass, and lay down, expecting to die. There was just space enough on top of the rock for a man to lie. It was very cold weather, and the tide was coming up and would cover the rock. Several times he looked through a hole in his covering, but saw nothing. The last time he looked, he saw a man ascending the rock. The man came to him, and said, "Shaman, come with me!" The Tagish man arose and followed him, not noticing which way he went. At last they entered, as through a door, a house where there were many people. These people were Seal people. One of them was lying sick. He had been speared by a Tlingit. The Tagish man saw at once what ailed the sick man, but the Seal people did not know that he had a spear-head in his flesh. The Seal people had many dried and blown-up bladders hanging up in their house. They were of various sizes; and the Seal people told him that, if he should cure their friend, they would give him a small one to take him home. He looked at them, and thought that the largest one would be best for him. Now the Tagish man felt the barb in the sick man, and moved it so that it became loose; but he did not try to pull it out. The Seal people knew what he thought, and offered <pb n="236"/>him the largest bladder if he should completely cure their friend. Now he acted like a shaman, pulled out the barb and hid it. The sick man at once felt better. He arose, walked about, and ate. The people were pleased. 
Now they put the Tagish man into the bladder and tied its mouth. They told him that he must think only of the place where he was going, for otherwise he would come back to his starting-point. They said, "When you hear a grating-noise, you will know that you are at the shore. Then open the bladder and come out, tie it up again, and set it adrift. It will come back here." He started, but thought of the place he had left, and came back. He heard a grating-noise, came out, and found that he was at the place he had left. The people told him again, "If you want to get home, you must concentrate your thoughts on your place and people, the object of your desire." The same thing happened again. The third time he managed to keep his thoughts steadfast on his home, and soon reached the shore. He sent the bladder back, and then went to his house. 
It was in the middle of the night; and all the people were sleeping except his wife, who was crying. When she saw him, she told him that her brothers had informed her that he had fallen off the cliff and been drowned before they could render him assistance. He asked her to tell no one that he had returned. Taking all his tools, he went into the woods and lived alone. He made a model of a killer-whale out of balsam-wood, and tried it in the water. It would not work right or sink properly. He tried all the trees, but they acted in the same way. Then he tried cypress, which was nearly right. At last he tried cedar, which did well. When he put it into the water, it dived, and came up a long way off. He tested it several times, and it acted well. He told it to kill seals. It did so. He told it to kill whales, and it did that also. Now he said, "You will soon be a killer-whale. I made you for killing. By and by you will kill people. You will attack the canoes in a narrow channel." 
Spring-time came, and a number of people left in canoes to gather fish-eggs and seaweed. He sent the killer-whale out to attack them in the narrow channel. He told it to kill all the people except his one brother-in-law. The killer broke all the canoes to pieces; and the people were all drowned, including the three brothers-in-law. The friendly brother-in-law was spared, and floated ashore on a large broken piece of canoe. The Tagish man now had his revenge. Now he said to the killer-whale, "I will free you, and henceforth you will be a real killer-whale, but you must not kill people again; and when you kill seals or other animals, and the people ask you to let them have some meat, you must give them some." Thus, when the Tlingit see a killer-whale killing something, they say to it, "Give us some meat!" <pb n="237"/>and then it lets some pieces float up to the surface, and the people catch them. 
Now, after a time, the Tagish man made a totem-pole representing the killer-whale, and showed it to the people. At the same time he danced, and told his story. Thus the Wolf phratry obtained this crest. The right to use it belongs to them. The Nanaaʹi clan of the Wolf phratry wanted to possess the crest. They gave a great potlatch, and killed many slaves. The other Wolf clans tried to beat them, but could not do so. The Nanaaʹi gave a greater potlatch, and killed more slaves; and thus the crest became theirs, and remains in their possession to-day. 
