NNA026085
<note>See Tlingit (Swanton, BBAE 39 : 222, 280). The name Cāʼkinā (CāqAnayîʼ) is also Tlingit. See also Kaska (JAFL 30 : 466).</note> 
Cāʼkinā was a great hunter, and killed much game. He had two wives, Beaver and Porcupine, who carried home all the meat and skins. They were of evil disposition, and killed any people who came to the camp when their husband was away. With them lived their mother-in-law, who was a very old woman. In another part of the country lived a woman and her daughter, a young girl. Living alone, and having no male relatives to hunt for them, they were very poor and often short of food. One day when the mother was away, the girl, who was very hungry, stole a small piece of tallow that her mother had stored away. On her return, the mother missed the fat, and charged her daughter with taking it. The girl at first denied having <pb n="245"/>touched it, but later confessed, and stated thet she had eaten it because she was very hungry. Her mother scolded her, and took a club to beat her. She ran away; and her mother chased her a little way, and called to her, "You must never come back until you marry Cāʼkinā, who alone can supply you with enough fat. She thought this was an impossibility; for he lived far away, and, besides, his wives were very jealous, and killed every woman who came near them. The girl travelled until she reached Cāʼkinā's house, where she found the old woman, his mother, alone. The old woman asked her how she had come there, and the girl told her the whole story. She then said to the girl, "I am afraid my son's wives will kill you, but I will hide you until my son comes home." When Cāʼkinā came home, his mother told him of the girl being there; and he answered, "I am afraid my wives will attempt to kill her, but I shall protect her." Soon afterwards his wives came home, bringing heavy loads of meat. When they entered the house, both became very angry. Beaver put up her tail and snarled, and Porcupine put up her quills and struck with her tail. They sniffed in the air, and said, "We smell a strange woman." Their husband told them to remain quiet, otherwise he should put them out; but they persisted. Cāʼkinā took a club and struck them, and drove them out of the house. They still continued to be angry. Therefore he chased them away, and told them never to come back. He then returned to the house and took the girl to wife. 
Beaver<note>For the next section see RBAE 31 : 724 (Jicarilla Apache, Haida, Hare, Nass, Tlingit, Tsimshian).</note> and Porcupine travelled away until they came to a river, across which Beaver swam. Porcupine cried much, because she could not swim: so Beaver swam back again to her, and told her to get on her back. As Porcupine was afraid, Beaver put a stone<note>See Kaska (JAFL 30 : 210?); also Tahltan, No. 34, to be published later.</note> on her back, and swam across with it. Then she took a heavier stone and swam with it. At last Porcupine was satisfied that Beaver could carry her, and went on her back. Beaver swam across with her, and they made a camp near by. They found that they were on an island. Afterwards Beaver swam across the stream on the opposite side of the island, saying she would return in a while. Porcupine became short of food, and she could not swim across: she therefore sang for cold weather to come; she called the stars to come out, and kept counting them until the night became very cold. The river froze up, and Porcupine crossed on the ice to the place where Beaver was. Winter had set in, and the two women asked each other how they should provide food for the winter. Hitherto they had lived on meat; but now they must use some different kind of food, for neither of them could kill game. They agreed that they would have plenty of food by eating the bark of trees. 
<pb n="246"/>Now<note>For the next section see p. 224, No. (33).</note> they talked about the winter, and how long it should last. Beaver said we should have as many winter moons as scales on her tail, and she began to count them. She held up her tail while talking, and persisted in what she had said. Porcupine said, "The people would all starve; and I myself could not live, or endure such a long winter. I want four months of real winter, and the rest of the year favorable weather for travelling around, and not too cold." Beaver insisted, and so did Porcupine. The latter became angry and bit off her thumb, and held up her four fingers in front of Beaver's face, saying, "I tell you, there will be only four real winter months." Beaver then gave in, and agreed with Porcupine. This is the reason why now there are but four months of steady cold weather in each year; also the reason why the porcupine now has only four claws, instead of five as formerly. 
Now the women talked of where they would live. Finally it was agreed that Beaver should live in low places along rivers, and Porcupine should go in the high places in the mountains. This is why these animals inhabit these localities now. Porcupine said, " It is now winter-time, and we should build houses to live in. Let us see who will manage to build a house first! We shall each know which house is finished first by lighting a fire inside and letting the smoke issue." Now they separated, and built their houses. Porcupine made her house between rocks at the roots of trees, and covered it with bark. She had it finished long before Beaver, and sent up a column of smoke to let Beaver know her house was completed. Beaver made her house of sticks very carefully and with great labor. This is the reason why these animals now make houses as they do at the present day. 
Cāʼkinā liked his new wife, and soon after his marriage went with her to see his wife's mother. The girl filled her house with fat, thus paying back the tallow she had eaten. Her mother was surprised when she brought back Cāʼkinā as her husband. Henceforth Cāʼkinā and his wife and the two mothers-in-law lived together. Cāʼkinā hunted for all, and they always had plenty to eat. 
