NNA026115
<note>Compare Kaska (Teit, JAFL 30 : 459).</note> 
A man lived with his wife and children near the head of a creek; and near by, at the head of another creek on the opposite side of the mountain, lived his sister and her husband. Often, when her husband was out hunting, the man went to his sister and cohabited with her. Her husband became suspicious and watched her. On several successive days he saw a man go into the camp. He asked his who it was that visited her; and she answered, "Only my brother, that is nothing." The husband said no more. After this he came home one day and found him with his wife. He was angry, and they fought. The brother killed him, and, opening up his body, defecated inside.<note>Compare Chilcotin (Farrand, JE 2 : 16), Kaska (Teit, JAFL 30 : 459).</note> After this the brother spent more time with his sister than with his wife. The game that he killed he took to her, and nothing to his wife and family. His wife noticed that he looked tired every night, and in many ways showed that he had killed game. Still he always came home empty-handed, and claimed to have killed nothing. The family was starving; and the wife proposed that her husband go and see his brother-in-law, as he might have plenty of meat. He <pb n="239"/>answered that he had been there, and his brother-in-law also could get no game and was out of food [he wanted his wife to starve]. One day when her husband was away, the woman went to her sister-in-law's camp, and found it full of meat. She also found the dead body of her sister-in-law's husband, and saw what had been done to it. Her own husband was not there. She returned to camp, and made an arrow with a specially large head. The next day, when her husband was away, she went to his sister's camp, and concealed herself in a place adjacent to the dead body in which he defecated, but at a lower level. When he came to the place to defecate, she shot the arrow up his anus. He cried out, "Come, sister! Some one is killing me! " His sister ran out, and the woman killed her also. She opened up both the bodies and defecated in them, saying, "Now I have my revenge." As she had many children, she moved to the camp where the dead bodies were, and lived there, as there was a vast supply of meat. Later she and her children returned to the main body of the people, and told them of the wickedness of her husband and his sister. They approved of her deed. 
