NNA026042
<note>Kuwega′n is the Tlingit word meaning 'deer.' The custom here referred to has been described by Swanton (RBAE 26 : 451), and is referred to in Swanton, BBAE 39 : 128. It is also referred to in the peace procedure between Tlingit and Tsimshian described by Boas (RBAE 31 : 378). The custom is also practised by the Tahltan.</note>
Once the animals were in two groups, living in different places.<note>For stories in which the animals are in two groups and make peace with each other, see Lillooet (Teit, JAFL 25 : 358-360), Shuswap (Teit, JE 2 : 658, 659). - J. A. TEIT.</note> The Moose, Caribou, Deer, and others, numbering very many people, lived together; and the Goat, Sheep, Bear, and others formed the other group. The latter group of people made war on the former, and, surprising them, killed them all excepting Weasel [or Ermine], whom they spared. She was a very light-skinned woman, and they <pb n="214"/>made a slave of her. After they had brought her to their country, they treated her very badly and abused her. At last they took her to an islet in the sea, which was always covered over at high tide, left her there. When she was nearly drowned, Raven came in a canoe and took her off. She became his wife, and told him of the fate of her kindred. He determined to go to her country and see for himself. 
When they reached there, he saw the bodies of the slaughtered people still lying intact. He asked his wife to point out the bodies of those who had been slaves. She did as directed, and he separated them. He skinned all the slaves, and wrapped their skins around the paddles of his canoe. The corpses of the other people he arranged in a row along the shore. Now he went in his canoe with the woman, and took the steering-place. He told her to put her paddle in the water; and when he cried "Kuk!"<note>Said to be a Tlingit word or exclamation.</note> she was to lift it up out of water at once. "Then," he said, "all the corpses will come to life and will stand up." In no case was she to bear down on her paddle; for, if she did this, the people would be killed more dead than they were now. His wife did as directed; and when he called the word, she lifted up her paddle, and all the corpses arose. The people were glad, and said, "You made us alive. You shall be our chief. We will give you presents and slaves. You may keep our daughter the Weasel, whom you have, and we will give you others for your wives if you wish." Raven said that he did not care for more than one wife. 
The people all went aboard their canoes to go and take revenge on the enemy. Raven and his wife went ahead of them in their small canoe, which was very strangely and prettily carved and ornamented on the prow. The people of the enemy village saw a great fleet of canoes coming, and thought it must be a war-party or some great party of strangers coming to visit them. They all gathered on the shore and watched the ornamented canoe, which was in the lead. Raven told his wife to hold her paddle in the water, and, when he called "Kuk!" to push it down. She did this, and immediately all the people fell down dead where they stood. Raven was sorry, and said, "It is not good that I should make all the people die in this way. If people keep on killing one another, soon there will be no people left." The Deer people said, "What you have done is right. If they become alive, they will attack us again, for there are many bad people among them." Raven called one of the dead men, made him stand up alive, and asked him to point out the bodies of those people who were good. Raven then called all of the latter to life, and left the others dead. 
Now he told the two groups of people to make friends. They talked a long time, and tried to agree. At last the chief of the Deer <pb n="215"/>people proposed that his side give a certain number of warriors to the other side as hostages, and the other side give to them the same number for hostages. "Then we will feast each other's hostages and dance, wearing eagle-feathers.<note>The tail-feathers of eagles which have mottled plumage and are slow of flight are the kind used in the Kuwegan ceremony as emblematic of peace. - J. A. TEIT.</note> Afterwards we will exchange the hostages again, thus making kuwega′n and peace." Raven said this would be a good plan, so they exchanged man. Moose, Caribou, and Deer, on the one side, were willing to dance; and Deer made the best kuwega′n. The men of the other side were not so willing to dance, especially Sheep and Goat, who refused to use the eagle-feathers emblematic of peace. Raven then became angry, and, taking four eagle tail-feathers, he stuck two of them in the of Goat, and two in the head of Sheep. They became horns. He said to them, "Now you will always wear feathers. Other people will be able to take off their feathers [i.e., antlers] when night [i.e., winter] comes, and put on new ones in the daytime [i.e., summer], and thus always have clean feathers;<note>With reference to the shedding of the antlers of moose, caribou, and deer. - J. A. TEIT.</note> but you will always wear yours, and they will get old and dirty." All the people now danced and made peace. For eight days they danced. Thus was the Kuwega′n ceremony instituted. Raven told all the people, "Thus will you make peace after fighting. I have done much for you, and have often nearly lost my life trying to benefit you. I obtained for your use light, fire, water, and other things. It is not good if you fight all the time and kill one another."
