NNA026046
<note>See BBAE 59 : 302 (Blackfoot, Caddo, Cheyenne, Kutenai, Menominee, Pawnee, Shuswap, Thompson).</note>
The game-mother<note>The Tahltan believe in a woman who is mother and controller of all the game-animals. See "Atsᴇntmā, or the Meat-Mother," No. 9, p. 230. - J. A. TEIT.</note> <pb n="217"/>called all the animals home to see how fast they could run. She made them run very fast. Caribou ran fastest of all, and said to his mother, "I can beat them all;" and she answered, "Good!" He ran so fast, that nothing could get near him. All the game ran so fast, that people could not get them. Many people were starving. Raven said, "Too many people are starving. I must try to curtail the powers of the game, so that people may be able to obtain food. I will kill the game with my glance." The game-mother had called all her children home, and no animals could be seen anywhere by the people. 
Raven travelled to the house of Game-Mother, which was very distant. Covering up his head, he entered the house and sat down. He said to Game-Mother, "The people have plenty of game where I come from. You have not done a wise thing. Calling your children home is no revenge on us, nor does it harm us, for the people are getting all the game they require." She answered, "It cannot be as you say. I have all my children here, so the people cannot be well off for game." Raven said, "No, all the game cannot be here," and they disputed over this. Game-Mother called all the game into her presence to prove that they were all there. Raven said, "It is no use for you to call them here. I cannot see them." Raven now said to her, "We kill game simply by looking at it. No matter how fast game runs, we can kill them." Game-Mother would not believe this, so Raven opened his eyes and looked at the game, who were immediately shot by his glance.<note>Some say, "The same as if arrows shot out of his eyes."</note> 
The animals saw no bow and arrows in Raven's hands, and did not know that they were shot. They all became sick. He said to them, "Now, run!" but they could not move. He said to Caribou, "Hold up your foot!" He looked at it, and said, "Oh, your lower leg is nothing but bone, that is why you can run so fast." He took some of the flesh from his upper leg and put it on the lower. "Now," he said, "run!" Caribou ran. Raven said, "That is all right. Men will be able to run you down sometimes." This is why there is a little meat now in front of the lower legs of caribou, below the knee. Next he examined the Bear, and said, "Oh, your legs are too long! No wonder you can run!" He broke Bear's leg in halves, and said, "Now your legs are short, and people will be able to catch you sometimes." This is why the legs of bears are short and crooked at the present day. Thus he changed all the game-animals, so that the people should be able to hunt them and get them. 
Now he addressed them, saying, "Your mother will still have the power of calling you home,<note>She has the power of making game scarce in certain places. When this happens, the Indians believe that some one has not treated the animals respectfully or has failed <pb n="218"/>to make full use of them as food, and that therefore their mother has called them home for a time or for good, as a warning or punishment to the Indians. In similar circumstances and for like reasons the interior Salish say that game-animals have gone home or back to their own world under ground, whence they first came. - J. A. TEIT.</note> but that is all. None of you will be able <pb n="218"/>to run as before. When you see a hunter coming, run a little, slack up and look back, also stop sometimes. If you run hard, I shall kill you." All the game-animals were afraid of Raven's threat, and promised to do as he had decreed. This is why game is easy to hunt now. Then Raven said, "I have used my glance for killing things. I think this is bad. If people have this power, they will not be able to look at one another. Henceforth people shall not have this power."<note>Some add, "except to a very limited extent." See incidents of killing by a glance in JAFL 9 : 258 (Tsʼetsʼāʼut); MAFLS 6 : 45 (Thompson); JE 2 : 650, 651 (Shuswap); see also JAFL 30 : 464 (Kaska); and the Tahltan story of Tseʼdᴇxtsi, or the girl who married the dog-man (No. 53), to be published later.</note> 
