NNA026026
<note>See RBAE 31 : 651.</note>
At this time there was no fresh water in the world except the rain. All other water was salt. Raven visited some people, and asked them for water to drink. They said, "We have none. Water is very scarce. We get a mouthful sometimes from the man who owns it. Wealthy people get a little more." Raven asked the name of the man, and where he lived. They told him that the man's name was Kanuʼgu,<note>Kanuʼgu or Kanuʼge. According to Tahltan information, this mythological personage appears to be a water-deity or sea-god of the Tlingit. He is said to have been the first man created (or the first man in the world). He is the most ancient of the ancients, and has been from the beginning of the world. He was on earth long before the Flood. He is eternal, and will never die. He is the only man who ever lived that never told a lie. Among the Tahltan, when a person's word is doubted or certain information is in doubt, they say, "Kᴇnuʼge told me," or "Kᴇnuʼge said it." This saying is much in vogue among young people, and is always meant in a jocular way. The Tlingit are said to pray to Kᴇnuʼge, asking for fine, clear weather. They make offerings to him when <pb n="202"/>supplicating, and put their offerings or sacrifices in the fire or in the sea. When they pray to him, they turn seaward or to the west.</note> and <pb n="202"/>they pointed out where he lived. Raven went to Kanuʼgu's house and entered. He called him "brother-in-law," and asked for a drink. Kanuʼgu said, "Water is very scarce. I can give you only a mouthful." Raven watched where Kanuʼgu obtained the water, and saw that it was kept in a hole like a cellar in a strong house. Kanuʼgu watched it all night, and slept by it in the daytime. When Raven had taken a mouthful, he went out and deliberated what to do. A shower of rain came, and Raven opened his mouth and caught as much of it as he could. He returned to Kanuʼgu's house, keeping the water in his mouth. Kanuʼgu spoke kindly to him when he entered, and asked him how he had fared. Raven said, "I feel very full and swelled out. I am full to the mouth with the water I have drunk." Kanuʼgu asked him where he had obtained it, and Raven answered, "I found some in a certain place. There is much of it there. You are not the only one who possesses water." Raven then spit out the water he had in his mouth, and Kanuʼgu almost believed him. 
Raven said, "I will work for you, chopping wood and doing any-thing you wish, for my food." Kanuʼgu agreed, and gave him tools with which to chop and split wood; and Raven cut and carried wood to the house. After working there a while, Kanuʼgu became less suspicious of him. One day Kanuʼgu was asleep, as usual, alongside the hole in which he kept the water. Raven went outside, collected some excrements, and put them under Kanuʼgu, saying, "Brother-in-law, you have soiled your bed." Kanuʼgu was ashamed, for he thought he had really done it. Raven said, "My mother was always wont to tell me, when I did anything like that, that it meant I would have bad luck, that some of my friends or relatives would die or leave me, or that something bad would happen." Kanuʼgu did not know what to do. Raven said, "I know a medicine. If you take it, no bad luck will come to you." Kanuʼgu asked him what it was; and Raven said, "You must wash some distance away from the house with old urine. The Raven people do that, and wash one another." Kanuʼgu asked him if he belonged to the Raven phratry; and he answered, "Yes." Kanuʼgu then believed him, and, stripping off his clothes, asked him to wash him. Raven said, "You must open your eyes wide." Then Raven poured the urine over the head of Kanuʼgu, who for a while could not see. Raven ran quickly to the house, and drank as much as he could hold. Then he burst the tank and let the water run out. Just then a voice from the sky called, "Kanuʼgu, Raven is stealing your water!" Kanuʼgu reached his house too late to save his water. The tank was empty, and he saw <pb n="203"/>Raven flying away up through the smoke-hole. He threw pitch-wood on the fire; and the smoke went up so thickly, that Raven could not fly for a while, and stuck on the crosspiece in the smoke-hole. Here he was covered with soot, and became quite black; and that is the reason why ravens are black. Before this happened, Raven was white,<note>See RBAE 31 : 652. See also p. 208.</note> Now Raven flew off and scattered water all over the country saying, "Henceforth water will run here and there all over the country and every one will have plenty of water."<note>See p. 219.</note> 
