NNA026028
<note>See RBAE 31 : 641 (Anvik, Bellabella, Bellacoola, Carrier, Chilcotin, Alaskan Eskimo, Kaigani, Kodiak, Masset, Nass, Nootka, Rivers Inlet, Skidegate, Ten'a, Tlingit, Tsimshian).</note> 
At this time there was no daylight, or sun, moon, or stars. Raven went to a village and asked the people if they could see anything. They said, "No, but one man has daylight, which he keeps in a box in his house. When he takes off the lid, there is bright light in his house." The people could not work much, for it was night continually. Raven found out where Daylight-Man lived, and went to his house. This man also had control of the sun, moon, and stars. Raven went into the house and came out again. He planned what to do to get daylight for himself and the people. 
Daylight-Man had many slaves, and a daughter who had been a woman for three years, but she was still undergoing the ceremonies encumbent on girls at puberty. She lived apart in the corner of the house, in a room of her own, and was closely watched. She drank out of a white bucket every day, and she always examined the water before drinking, to see if there was anything in it. Slaves always brought the water to her. Raven changed himself into a cedar-leaf in the bucket of water the slave was bringing. The girl noticed it, and before drinking threw it out. He assumed his natural form again. Next day he transformed himself into a very small cedar-leaf, and hid in the water. The girl looked in the water, and, seeing nothing, she drank it all, and thus swallowed Raven. In the following month she had no period. Three months later she began to swell and her mother noticed this. The mother asked her if she had continued to have periods and she said that she had not had them for three months. The mother said, "Then you are pregnant and you have been with a man." Her parents asked her but she denied that she had been with a man; and they could not see how she could have been, as she had been so closely watched. After nine months she gave birth to a son. Her parents said they would rear the boy and acknowledge him as their grandson, even if he had no father. They said, if she told who the father of the child was, they would agree that he marry their daughter, they would treat their son-in-law well, and all would be well; but she persisted in saying that she had never seen man. 
The boy grew very fast, and soon was able to walk and talk. His grandfather loved him dearly. One day he cried very much and wanted to be allowed to play with the moon. His grandfather ordered the moon to be taken down and given to him. The boy was <pb n="205"/>pleased, and played with it until tired; and then they hung it up again. After a while he got tired of the moon and cried much, saying he wanted the sun. It was given to him; and he played with it until tired, then gave it back, and the people hung it up again. After a while he became tired of the sun, and cried for the Dipper [stars]. Now they allowed him to play with these things whenever he wanted. After a long time, when he felt strong, he cried for the daylight. His grandfather was afraid to give it to him, because it shed so much light; besides, whenever it was lifted up, the sun, moon, stars, and everything worked in unison with it. It was their chief. At last, however, the boy was allowed to have the daylight, but his grandfather was uneasy when he played with it. When the boy lifted up daylight, much light would come; and the higher he held it, the brighter became the daylight. On these occasions, when the boy held the daylight high, the old man would say, "Eh, eh!" as if he was hurt or extremely anxious. The boy balanced the daylight in his hands to get used to carrying it. 
At last, one day, he felt strong enough for the feat he intended to perform. He put two of the toys in each hand and balanced them. He felt he could carry them easily. Then, at a moment when the people were not watching, he flew out of the smoke-hole with them. He threw daylight away, saying, "Henceforth there shall be daylight, and people will be able to see and work and travel. After dawn the sun will rise; and when it sets, night will come. People will then rest and sleep, for it will not be easy to work and travel. Then the Dipper and moon will travel and give light. These things shall never again belong to one man, nor be kept locked up in one place. They shall be for the use and benefit of all people." He threw the sun to the east, the moon to the west, and the Dipper to the south. Since the introduction of daylight, people and game rise with daylight, and go to sleep with nightfall. 
