NNA026062
<note>See JAFL 30 : 440 (Kaska).</note> 
Sun was a bad man formerly, and killed people; but Moon was good. When men hunted in a certain place towards the east, they never <pb n="228"/>came back, and it was said "Sun killed them." A man who was wise and powerful said, "I am going to hunt over there in the east, whence the people never come back." He told his father, "If I do not return in five days, then look for me." He travelled one whole day, and thought of camping, but nowhere could he see a favorable place. He kept on going until it was almost dark, when he saw a good camping-place. He knew that some one was camped there, for he saw a bright light or fire. When he came near, he noticed lynx-meat cooking, and saw a man sitting near the fire with his head covered. This was the Sun, who invited the traveller to sit on the same side of the fire with him. The man, however, took the opposite side of the fire. He took off his snowshoes and his moccasins, and hung them up to dry. He saw Sun's moccasins hanging there, and exchanged them with his, hanging his own where Sun's had been. Sun did not see him, because his face was covered. Sun went to bed, telling the man that if he was hungry, he should eat lynx-meat, and that before he went to bed he must put on the hollow log that was underneath the wood-pile. "Put half of it in the fire," he said. The man did as directed. He then pretended to sleep, and watched. Sun got up, and, taking what he thought was the man's moccasins, put them in the fire. Next morning the man got up early and put on his moccasins. Sun claimed that they were his; but the man proved that the moccasins he had on were his own, for Sun could not put them on. They did not fit his feet. 
The man said, "Now I have found you out, Sun. You burn people's moccasins so that they cannot leave. Now you have none, and you cannot leave." Sun begged the man for moccasins, if he had a spare pair. The man said, "Yes, I will give you my spare pair of moccasins, if you will promise to go so far away that there will never be any danger of people coming near to you." [Sun had told the man that sometimes people were killed and burned by coming too near to him.] Sun promised as the man asked, and the latter gave him his spare moccasins. Sun then left, and afterwards lived far away. No more did he burn people or come near them; but when people look at him now, sometimes they get sick. He is hard to look at. This is because he was formerly a bad man. 
