NNA019448
Xatē′tsᴇn was sitting in his house when his attendant came and said, "Don't sit here in the house, for somebody is coming to the beach here." - "Maybe this is what I am expecting, that will make things right on the beach." Then Xatē′tsᴇn went out of his house to invite Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ. Then [Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ] entered the house of Xatē′tsᴇn, and he was given dried [salmon to eat. It was dried] meat of the double-headed serpent. Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ began to eat it, and his body became contorted. Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "Don't urge our friend here [to eat]." Then Xatē′tsᴇn and Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ went out of the house. Xatē′tsᴇn looked at his salmon-weir. Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ transformed him into stone. Xatē′tsᴇn became a man again, because he also had supernatural power. [He said,] "Go on, take warning, friend! Now I will also do something to you." Then Xatē′tsᴇn transformed his friend into stone, but Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ became a man again. 
Then he warned Xatē′tsᴇn. "Take warning, friend! Now I will try you again." They took hold of each other, and Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ held Xatē′tsᴇn by his sides. He lifted him up. Then Xatē′tsᴇn was transformed into fog. He became a man again. Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "Go on, take warning, friend! Now I will do something to you also." Then Xatē′tsᴇn lifted Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ and threw him upward. Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ also became fog. Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ became a man again. 
<pb n="5"/>Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ spoke. "Go on, take warning, friend! Now I will try to lift you from the rock." Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ took hold of Xatē′tsᴇn and threw him upward. He transformed Xatē′tsᴇn into a crane, and the crane began to fly. Xatē′tsᴇn became a man again. Then he also warned Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ. "Go on, take care, friend!" Then Xatē′tsᴇn took hold of Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ and threw him upward. A crane was flying there. Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ became a man again. 
Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "Oh, indeed, you have supernatural power, friend! Come, let us go to my playground." Then they went aboard his canoe, and they paddled, going to Xatē′tsᴇn's play-round. They were dressed quite with the same kind of belts; namely, double-headed serpents. Double-headed serpents also were their canoes. Then they arrived at the playground. 
Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "Take care, friend! else you might have a mishap on my playground. Nobody who ever tried to come and play on it has succeeded a single time. This is what makes it slippery, the blood of those who came from time to time to play here." Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "You go on first, friend!" Thus Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ was told by his friend. "[No,] you first," said Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ. "You said that it is your playground." - "Let me go first, friend," said Xatē′tsᴇn, on his part. Then he [Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ] clapped on the gunwale of his canoe with his paddle, and Xatē′tsᴇn ran up. Xatē′tsᴇn ran straight up. He did not rest on his resting-place halfway up: he just turned round and came down again and jumped into his canoe. 
Then Xatē′tsᴇn spoke. "Now you go, friend!" Thus he said to Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ. "Take care, fasten your belt well, else it might [drag] behind you!" Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ ran. He had nearly reached the top when he <pb n="7"/>slipped on the rock. His belt came off, and Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ fell down. He fell into the water and sank. Then Xatē′tsᴇn went away to Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ's canoe, and upset it on the water. "Indeed, you have no real supernatural power, friend," thus he said while upsetting Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ's canoe. 
Xatē′tsᴇn waited in vain for Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ to show himself, but Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ just did mischief to Xatē′tsᴇn's land. Q Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ transformed into stone a beaver that was sitting by the river. Then Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ caught sight of the watchman at the salmon-weir of Xatē′tsᴇn. He transformed into stone him and his pole. Then he also transformed into stone the watchman of Xatē′tsᴇn. Then Xatē′tsᴇn was vanquished by Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ, for Xatē′tsᴇn did not know what Q!ā′nēqēᵋlakᵘ was doing. 
