NNA025216
<pb n="224"/>Dca'ndūi was a celebrated hunter who killed and trapped all kinds of game. Once he went trapping marmots, but could not catch any because his traps were sprung. Although he watched, he could not find out what sprung them. He fasted three days, and then made his deadfalls heavier. Again he fasted three days, and this time he caught somebody by the hand. The man begged him to spare him, and told him that he would go to his camp with him and help him. Dca'ndūi agreed; and the man, who was Wolverene, accompanied him. Wolverene told Dca'ndii to fast for three more days and to save all the urine. Dca'ndūi wondered what he wanted to do with the urine, and watched through a hole in his blanket. When it was nearly daylight, he saw Wolverene get up and wash himself in the urine and then dry himself. That day they both set traps. Next day Wolverene had a marmot in each of his traps, while Dca'ndūi had none. Wolverene now told Dca'ndūi that he must not eat the small bone at the back of the knees of marmots. He wondered why Wolverene had told him that, and one day he ate one. Then came a spell of rain, snow, wind, and bad weather. All the marmots staid in their holes, and they could not catch any. Wolverene charged Dca'ndoi with having eaten the forbidden bone, but he denied it. Then Wolverene went and examined his excrement and found it. He said to Dca'ndūi, "You lied about not eating the bone, but I found it." He wrapped it in feathers and burned it, saying, "To-morrow good weather will come." After this they caught many marmots in their traps, and they soon had the camp full of meat. 
When Dca'ndūi was ready to go home, Wolverene said he would carry the meat for him. Dca'ndūi made up a pack for Wolverene about the same size and weight as he himself could carry. Wolverene said it was too light, so Dca'ndūi added more to it. Wolverene said, "I can carry more;" so he added more. At last all the meat was in Wolverene's pack, and he walked off with it as a man does with an ordinary load. When they arrived on the outskirts of the village, Wolverene put down his load and returned. He told Dca'ndūi not to tell any one that he had helped him. When Dca'ndoi arrived home, the people asked him what luck he had had. He answered, "Poor luck. I have a very small pack of meat. I left it some little distance away." He told a man to go out and bring it in. The man could not move it, so he came back and told all the people to go and <pb n="225"/>see it. They went out, and it took all of them to carry it in. They thought Dca'ndūi must be a very strong man. This is why wolverenes can carry such heavy loads now, and also why the Indians neaver eat the small bones at the backs of marmots' knees. 
