NSA010113
Plenty of people went out to hunt, but on the way back, four of them were caught by nightfall when far away from home. These four comprised a man, his wife, and two daughters; and a long, long way behind them was yet another man. This last man shouted out to the four others, "Hi! Stop! wait for me! wait for me!" to which they replied, "Come along quick, and follow us." But as he could never reach them, he kept on singing Mawa-kakotú [lit. "for me - wait"]. He is the little night owl, who still sings like this. The darkness was now so thick that the four could get no farther. They had to remain where they were, and though they waited and waited, no daylight came. In the meantime they made a fire from ite-palm leaves, but it burned away too quickly; it was no good. They then rolled some wax in a leaf, but this also burned away too quickly: it too was no good. The parents, seeing a little dawn a long distance away in the bush, sent the elder daughter to go and bring it. She went on and on, but zigzag and crossways just like a drunken man, a token that she would never obtain the daylight. She walked in a crooked way because she had already had dealings with a man. Finally she reached the spot where the daylight was, and there she came across an old man and his wife. She asked for his son, but as he was out at work, the old man bade her to wait. When at last the old man's son did reach home, the mother said: "A friend has come to see you. She has waited long. You had better ask her what she wants," And when he asked her what she wanted, she told him how her father had sent her to fetch some daylight. Pulling out his key, he began to enter the casket, but the key<note>When I reminded the old Warrau informant that Indians had no looks and keys, she told me that the story as told above is just as she heard it, and that old time people do not like to mention bad (i. e. indecent) things. - W. E. R.</note> would not fit, the lock having been tampered with, and he therefore sent her home again. When she got back, empty handed the younger sister said, "I will try to get some daylight," and although her father told her she was too young to go, she insisted, and went. She did not stumble on the road from one side to the other because as yet she had never had anything to do with a man, and she reached the spot without trouble. Like her sister, she had to await the young man's return, and when he did arrive, his old mother said: "I don't know what is the <pb n="267"/>matter with your friends. They have never come to visit you like this before. There is another young woman come to see you." On learning that she had come to fetch daylight he inserted the key into her casket and showed her how to use it. He gave her the Daylight, which she brought back to her parents and sister.<note>Among the Paressi (Peru) there is a vaginal origin ascribed to both organic and inorganic nature (PE, 33).</note> 
