NSA010334
A yékamuš was married to a woman who was very jealous of him. He concerned himself intensively with the welfare of his fellowmen, and that displeased her. Once when they were making a journey in their canoe she said scornfully: "I thought you were a capable yékamuš! Other people you provide with all kinds of food; but for me you won't let either a whale or any other kind of fish be stranded; you get me neither birds nor crabs. You ought to take much better care of your <pb n="185"/>wife!" The yékamuš became very annoyed at these words and without answering he lay down. Although he kept his eyes closed his wife continued nagging him. She did not stop until the shaman was snoring loudly. She steered her canoe toward Káawaia. Meanwhile the yékamuš slept, and he called forth two lakúma from far away [in the west]. Finally the lakúma arrived in Káawaia, seized the canoe, and lifted the bow high up. Fearfully the woman called her husband who was still asleep: "Get up and help me in this danger; after all, you are a yékamuš!" He replied very calmly: "Try to manage on your own. Often enough you have given me to understand that I am powerless!" She implored him: "Don't be so stubborn and help me, lest the lakúma kill me!" When his wife had been trembling there for some time the man got up but he still did not move a finger. The woman was in terrible fear. At last he ordered her: "Paint both lakúma with white paint!" She replied: "Impossible, I'll never be able to do that!" Then he told her: "Give me the paint." He approached the bow with it, leaned over, and painted both lakúma; one was on the right side and the other on the left. The lakúma let this happen without any resistance. Afterward the yékamuš straightened himself, stretched out both arms, and laughed: "Hi, hi ..." The two lakúma slowly lowered the canoe and dived down. Instantly they sent a favorable wind for the canoe so that it soon reached its destination. The woman had completely changed her mind and ruefully confessed to her husband: "Until today I have made fun of you and had a very low opinion of you; now I know that you are truly a capable yékamuš!" 
