NSA010312
<pb n="127"/>Old Tútu<note>This name probably belongs to the Myiotheretes rufiventris, a small bird with black feathers and a white spot on the head. According to this story he, as a yékamuš, had the habit of rubbing white soil into his hair.</note> had long been a widower. Because his unmarried children had died, too, he lived with his son-in-law. The latter had willingly received the old man in his hut, for it was his duty as son-in-law to do so. As the old man had no other relatives, his son-in-law cared for him and supported him during the last days of his life. Every day the son-in-law went to the beach, fetched mussels and meat, and occasionally brought fruits from the forest. But the old man was forever dissatisfied. Nothing was to his liking; although he ate of everything that his son-in-law brought he was always complaining about it. He used to say: "I'm very old already but I do feel like chewing something that I really like!" Then the son-in-law would look for other things and bring something new to the hut every day. But that would not please the old man, either, for after tasting it he would again say discontentedly: "I'm very old already but I do feel like chewing something that I really like!"<note>Note that the father-in-law avoids direct address and discussion. In the same way the son-in-law does not dare to ask openly, for which reason he stands there totally at a loss and has to do his own thinking. This agrees completely with the prevailing customs (Gusinde 1937:658).</note> 
It displeased the son-in-law that the old man was dissatisfied all the time. He did not say anything about it for that did not befit him; he had to show respect for his father-in-law. But secretly he was completely at a loss and wondered: "What might it be that the old man wants to chew and that he would really like?" He thought about it and continued to bring more things which he put before his father-in-law. The latter tasted and chewed everything but always followed it with the same discontented remark. The son-in-law then brought a few hard things. Old Tútu chewed them but he remained nonetheless dissatisfied and nothing suited him. The son-in-law again reflected; he continued to search, always bringing new and harder things.<note>Clearly expressed is the effort of the son-in-law to please his father-in-law in the only way possible for him. Yamana customary law requires this of children-in-law.</note> 
<pb n="128"/>One day he brought strips of úri<note>The fibers just under the bark on the stem of the Nothophagus species. They are pulled off in long strips and, as long as they are still soft and pliable, used for sewing together the big pieces of bark in the canoes (Gusinde 1937:445).</note> and put them before the old man. When the latter saw the úri fibers he began to chew them. He calmed down noticeably, cheered up, chewed on them with much pleasure, and became very contented. Now at last he no longer complained but said with great satisfaction: "This is what I like!" When the son-in-law heard these words he gave a sigh of relief and said cheerfully: "How happy and pleased my father-in-law is at last with the úri fibers that I brought for him. Now I shall provide him with lots of them. How could I have guessed that it's precisely the tough úri fibers that he likes so much!" From then on he went out every day and always brought back piles of úri which he put before his father-in-law. The latter would begin to chew the fibers at once; and that is all he did. After he had thoroughly chewed a large amount of fibers he took pieces of bark and sewed them together with the úri fibers. This is how canoes were invented. He made many such canoes and gave them to the people. Since then one always needs úri to sew the pieces of bark together. Such a canoe withstands the waves for a long time. 
