NSA010299
<pb n="81"/>There were once two brothers who lived together. The elder brother had a wife; the younger one was still a bachelor. They both lived in the same hut and had been together in this way for a long time. Eventually it came about that the younger brother fell in love with his sister-in-law. The two met very often and caressed each other in every way. 
After some time the elder brother became aware of their love play. He watched the two until he was finally convinced that they loved each other. He did not reveal anything to his younger brother. But one day when the latter had gone far away the elder brother called his wife and said to her: "I have often watched you caressing your brother-in-law, because you are very much in love with him. If you don't stay away from my brother I'll punish you severely and much to your own great shame. Mark my words: if henceforth you don't stay away from my <pb n="82"/>brother I will no longer believe your love for me. Then I'll take thorough revenge; I'll turn myself into a powerful bird with claws strong enough to seize you and lift you up. So be careful! Otherwise I'll carry out my plan of revenge and you'll be disgraced and shamed." The woman listened in silence. 
After a while the two renewed their love play. The woman seemed to have totally forgotten her husband's threats of harsh punishment and humiliating shame. For a long time the two met secretly just as often as before and yielded to their desire. At last the elder brother left his hut for good and withdrew into the forest to carry out the threats against his faithless wife. 
In the forest he built himself a hut and stayed there. He now began experimenting to see if he could turn himself into a bird. He often left his hut to watch the birds. Before long he noticed that every bird builds its nest high up in a tree. He, too, then left his hut and climbed up into a tree. He continued to watch all the birds very closely to see what they did. He discovered how every bird sits on a twig or at the edge of the nest when it defecates and lets the excrement fall down. Thus he, too, from then on sat on a twig when he defecated and let the excrement fall down. He continued to watch the birds and soon began to imitate their singing. He studied their movements too and began to move his arms exactly as birds move their wings, and to jump exactly as they do. 
After a long time he visited the hut where his wife was living with his younger brother. The latter received him with mocking laughter and said scornfully: "Well, when are you finally going to transform yourself into a bird? From what I can see you still have a long way to go. You probably won't make it at all. Anyway, it's taking you pretty long!" The elder brother said nothing in reply to these mocking words. He saw that his wife was still playing around with his younger brother, even more intensely than before. That made him sad. Without saying a word he left his hut and hurried back into the forest. Again he watched very attentively what the birds were doing, and for a long time imitated them in every detail. 
He stayed there. Every day he tried to transform himself into a bird. Then his brother and his wife would become convinced and he would take revenge on them. 
After a long time he again visited the hut. As before his younger brother received him with scornful laughter and addressed him with jeers: "I see you still haven't turned into a bird! It's taking very long. I think you'll never make it." To these insulting words the elder brother answered nothing. Again he had to watch his wife embrace and caress her brother-in-law. She spoke quietly but her husband could clearly hear the scornful words: "This blockhead will try for a long time and <pb n="83"/>still won't get anywhere! The better for us!" Thereupon the elder brother became very sad and despondent. He left his hut at once, firmly determined never again to return. He hurried straight into the forest and stayed there for good. Again he watched the birds and imitated everything they did. And indeed: from day to day he gradually lost his own speech and adopted the sounds of the birds. Also his mouth changed its shape and slowly a real bird's beak was formed. His arms, too, changed into wings and his legs and feet became the legs and feet of a bird. Little feathers began to grow all over his body. 
For a long time he did not come back to the hut. So one day the younger brother went out into the forest to look for him and see how he was doing. Soon he found his elder brother and saw that he now had changed a little. Then the younger brother gave a loud, scornful laugh and jeered: "Listen, my brother! How are you? I see you are still far from being a real bird! The whole thing is taking you quite some time! Well, I wish you lots of luck in your transformation!" Then he laughed very mockingly and went back to the hut. He told his sister-in-law everything and both fondled each other even more contentedly than before. 
After this the elder brother stayed in the forest without interruption. In fact he was slowly changing, becoming more and more like a bird. By now he was more bird than man. He continued to imitate the birds very closely in everything they did. That is how from day to day he turned increasingly more into a bird. 
Some time later the younger brother returned once more to the forest; he wanted to look at his elder brother. Indeed he found him in the same place and realized that he had almost become a bird. Scornfully he burst out laughing and said jeeringly: "Listen, my brother, how are you? I see you no longer have far to go to be a real bird. That is very good for me, isn't it! Then you'll always stay in the forest and never again come back to the hut." Very pleased the younger brother hurried back to his sister-in-law; he told her everything and both yielded to their desire more carefree even than before. 
In time the elder brother became a bird altogether. He lived more in the trees now where he had built himself a large nest, as all birds do. Whenever he had to defecate he sat on a branch and let his excrement fall down. His mouth had turned into a bent, sharp beak, his arms into wings, and his legs and feet had become the legs and feet of a bird, with sharp, powerful claws. A thick layer of feathers covered his entire body. 
One day the younger brother again came to the forest to see what had become of his elder brother. This time he brought his sister-in-law. He found his elder brother in the same place as always. He had now <pb n="84"/>become a bird altogether and was sitting in his nest with several other birds. The two laughed and jeered up to him; they were glad that finally he had changed completely, for now he would never again return to the hut. Full of joy over this they lay down on the moss, just under the treetop in which the elder brother was sitting; they yielded to their lust and copulated. When the falcon<note>Here the story finally makes the point that the elder brother changed himself into the grey gerfalcon. Circus cinereus, a considerably smaller species than the big gerfalcon, Polyborus tharus, cf. p. 86 n. 24.</note> saw this he became furious. He left his nest, spread his wide wings, and began to fly. Slowly he descended, and hovering a short distance above the ground he flew very close to the heads of those two. But they, totally overcome with passion, did not notice the big bird at all. He rose very high into the air and from up there thrust downward for the second time, flying swiftly. He drove his powerful, sharp claws into the bodies of the two who were still lying on the ground, lifted them up, and carried them to his nest. There he put them down. The many smaller birds at once fell upon the two, quickly and greedily hacked them to pieces, devoured the flesh, and threw the bones down over the edge of the nest. Only the penis and the vagina they left untouched. When they had eaten all the flesh only the genitals of those two were still left. These organs of the man and the woman were still united as in coitus. Kíxinteka [the transformed elder brother] seized them now with his claws, left his nest, and on his wide wings rose up into the air with them. 
It was a beautiful day. Not far from Kíxinteka's nest stood several huts, and many people lived there. Since the weather was so inviting everybody was playing kálaka in a wide, open meadow. The powerful gerfalcon came flying toward them and hovered in the air exactly above the spot where the people were playing. All noticed him. Then Kíxinteka opened his claws and let these united private parts of the man and the woman fall down into the circle of the people. As the genitals fell to the ground they made an odd sound. The people became frightened when they hit the ground so strangely. They wondered anxiously: "What kind of a strange sound is that? It's strange that something should come falling from up there!" They looked around everywhere and high up in the air they again caught sight of the powerful gerfalcon. Then they went up close to those genitals which had just fallen into their midst. Greatly surprised they stared at these things and said to one another: "Those are the genitals of a man and a woman, united as in intercourse. How odd!" They now discussed and thought about this incident. Soon they guessed it and said: "Those are the sexual organs of that man and his brother's wife! Kíxinteka let both fall down <pb n="85"/>from up there!" At last they recognized in him the elder brother. They cried out loudly: "So the elder brother took revenge because his wife had forbidden relations with his younger brother! Both got what they deserved!" 
