NSA010302
<pb n="91"/><note>See also Dabbene 1902:66-67; Martial 1882-1883:214.</note> 
One day on the beach a girl found a stone that in every way resembled a small child. The girl picked it up and began to play with it <pb n="92"/>just as girls play with dolls. She carried the stone in her arms, rocked and hugged it, fed it and adorned it as a mother does her infant.<note>As they explained it to me, in the old days, that is, before what this story describes happened, a doll was usually a small oblong stone which a girl would like and play with. The girl would watch over, care for, and fondle it, but hardly ever give it any actual clothes. Since the stone man developed from such a doll, girls were forbidden to use a stone for a doll out of fear that a stone man might once again arise from it (Gusinde 1937:765).</note> 
Once those people<note>I.e., the family group to which this girl belonged.</note> went with their canoes to the eastern Beagle Channel. When they got to Sínuwaia<note>Name for Bahía Poste west of Puerto Mejillones, on the northern edge of Isla Navarino. The structure of the name closely follows the rule governing this matter among the Yamana, according to which the name of the birthplace is used in personal names. The translation would be: ancient Sinulu.</note> the girl saw her stone slowly stir and move like a baby. Although it was and remained all stone, its eyes, the palms of its hands, and the soles of its feet were exactly like those of a foreigner [i.e., a European]. The girl was extremely happy over this. She started to nurse it so that it would not be hungry. But instead of drinking from it the stone child bit off her whole breast and the girl soon died. 
Then a woman took care of the stone child. She nursed and tended it well. But again when the woman gave it her breast to nurse the stone child bit off the entire breast, and the woman died. Although all the women became frightened at this, they still felt pity for the stone child and finally another woman took care of it. She tended and warmed it well. But when she gave it her breast to nurse it the stone child bit off the whole breast again. Thereupon also this woman died. 
The men finally became indignant and angry at all this. They took the stone child and hurled it into the wide channel. But the stone child came right back and chased their canoes. Again they seized it and threw it on the beach. But there it quickly got up and pursued the people along the length of the beach. They were no longer able to get away from it. At last the men seized clubs and started flailing the stone child; they threw heavy stones at it, brandished burning logs at it, and again hurled it into the water. But all their efforts were in vain. They were simply unable to kill the stone child or in any way get rid of it. It followed them always and everywhere. 
In time the stone child grew into manhood. He was so big and heavy that the men could no longer hurl him into the water or throw him on the beach. As time went by this stone man proved himself to be evil and unmanageable, even dangerous for all people. He started killing individual men and taking their wives to his own hut by force. His hut was in a remote place; there he lived with all the women he had kidnapped over time. He also began to bother the people who lived <pb n="93"/>farther away. Only those of Molinare [in the channel south of Angostura Murray] were spared. But if he saw any other canoe he followed it immediately, killed the men, and dragged their wives to his hut. By now he had brought together a large number of women, with whom he begot many children. But every newborn baby boy he killed; only girls were allowed to live. When they were old enough themselves he also begot children with them. But since he had many wives he had many worries and much work to obtain the necessary food. He did not allow his wives to get too far away from the hut to look for food. He himself was so strong that he easily pulled up a large beech tree, roots and all, if there were many of the small ésef [auáčix and aším mushrooms<note>The two well-known mushroom species Cyttaria darwinii and Cyttaria harioti (Gusinde 1937:554).</note>] on its branches. He carried this entire tree to the hut and placed it upright before the entrance so that his wives could pick off the mushrooms and eat their fill. The whole big beech had no sooner been picked clean of the many mushrooms than he dragged another one there. In this way he had already cleared half a forest. 
One day, while the stone man was pulling up a large beech, he got a thick thorn in his foot. Although he was made completely of stone the soles of his feet were those of a foreigner [European]. His foot hurt so badly that he could not walk on it; he dragged himself to the hut in terrible pain. "I have a thick thorn in my foot," he called to his wives from afar, "try to take it out for me at once!" All the women helped him to lie down on his bed. Then they fetched a long, pointed awl, the kind used to make holes in a piece of hide. They poked around with it in the wound to try to loosen the thick thorn. They actually found it, but acted as though it were very far into the flesh, and deliberately bored more and more deeply so that the wound became very large. The stone man could hardly stand it, so terribly did his foot hurt. But all the women continued drilling violently. At the same time they comforted him, saying: "Soon we'll reach the big thorn. Just endure it a little longer!" They had already bored a wide and deep hole in his foot. So much had the man suffered that he passed out on his bed. Soon he was snoring loudly and deeply. 
Swiftly the women discussed how they might be able to kill the powerful stone man. This to them seemed to be an opportune time. For some time they had hidden among them a little man, clever Omóra.<note>The hummingbird Sephanoides sephaniodes, a rare visitor in the Cape Horn archipelago.</note> They were keeping him safely concealed in a hole in the ground which they covered loosely with twigs; nobody could notice him there. Unobserved, they regularly brought him something to eat. Whenever <pb n="94"/>the stone man went far away from the hut the women let the little man out of his hole to enjoy a bit of fresh air. This little man was very dear to all the women. Since the stone man was now fast asleep and snoring loudly the women hurried to little Omóra and told him: "The evil stone man is fast asleep. Please help us kill him now!" At once he declared himself ready for this, and all the women sighed with joy. Little Omóra was extraordinarily clever and knew how to make excellent weapons. Earlier he had given many good arrowheads to all the women which they had carefully preserved. For a long time the women had had it in mind to kill the stone man. 
Near the bed at his feet they thrust into the ground a sturdy forked stick. They lifted his foot and placed it in the fork. Into the deep wound they pushed a long thick awl. The women had placed the stone man in such a way to begin with, that the soles of his feet faced toward the entrance of the hut. Now they all tiptoed out of the hut. On the outside they built a fire all around. The hut had been there for some time and the wood in the structure was very dry, so that the fire instantly flared up high. Meanwhile little Omóra quickly shot several arrows at the healthy foot of the stone man. Awakened by it, the stone man rose from his bed and jumped to his feet. When he planted both feet firmly on the ground he pushed the long thick awl deeper into the wound in one foot and felt the pain in the other foot now badly wounded by several arrowheads. On account of the pain he could no longer stand upright; he fell down and the flames enveloped him. But nimble Omóra had shot two arrows into his eyes, totally blinding him. The stone man was unable to move from the spot and defend himself. Soon the whole hut tumbled down on top of him and the burning poles completely covered his body. Although he tried repeatedly to get up he always collapsed. Then there was a terribly loud explosion that was heard over great distances: the stone man cracked all over and burst; the pieces flew in all directions. But strangely, each one of these fragments was alive, ready in turn to become a complete stone man. All the stones were leaping from the fire and jumping around outside the burning hut, and the women worked frantically to throw them right back into the fire so that they would die. The many stone fragments continued to jump and spurt from the fire, and the women continued to hurl the stones back into it. Omóra had ordered them to do that. And so, in spite of great weariness, they moved about very diligently. Finally the stone man's heart burst. Then there was a much stronger explosion, sounding like loud thunder. The stone man was completely dead. The last spurts of stone fell down at a great distance from his hut, moving no more. 
<pb n="95"/>Today one can still find such téši<note>These are the round black stones (Gusinde 1937:1213, fig. 93), used for the first time by the night-heron woman (ibid., p. 1220) as sinkers for fishing tackle (ibid., p. 547). They are thus thought to be "stone spurts" scattered about when the stone man burst. Similar round stones, called "boleadoras" (Gusinde 1931:268) may also be found on the Isla Grande in Selknam territory.</note> in that region. But the many women that were with the stone man turned into birds. Those are the tuwín<note>What is meant here is the so-called jilgero, a small meadow bird with yellowish-green feathers, which lives in the company of many of its own kind (Gusinde 1937:42).</note> which even today live together in great numbers. Little Omóra himself soon afterward went back to the north; since then he shows himself in our country only occasionally and very briefly. 
All the people, even those far away, had been living in anxiety and fear for a long time; they hardly dared go any distance out to sea in their canoes. That meant they often had to go hungry. For a while now they noticed that the stone man was no longer harassing them. Several men breathed a deep sigh of relief and speculated out loud: "That dangerous stone man is probably dead!" For everybody had heard the terrible, crashing explosion when the stone man burst. At last a few courageous men said: "Let's go out to his hut in order to see whether he'll attack us! If he doesn't show up we'll know for certain that he's dead!" No sooner said than done; they went out and drew close to his hut. There was nothing to indicate that he was there and still alive. That made all the men very much calmer and they happily returned to the camp. Several days later other men went to where the stone man's hut used to be; they found no trace of him. Now everyone breathed a deep sigh of relief and cried: "The stone man is dead; we're free once more!" 
