NSA010319
<pb n="150"/>Once there lived a bachelor who had fallen very much in love with another man's wife. He himself was a wetawémuwa, that is, an excellent slinger [wetáwa really means 'the stone thrown by the sling', but also denotes the sling itself], but the other man was stupid and clumsy. He thought long about how he might make the latter's wife his own. 
One day he said to the married man: "Why don't we go down to the beach and practice a bit with our slings!" The other replied: "I can't handle the sling very well." The bachelor insisted: "That's precisely why you have to practice. I'll be glad to help you!" They both went to the open beach and chose a target. They began throwing stones at the target with their slings. The bachelor scored a hit every time but the other always missed. Finally the married man said timidly: "It's strange that you hit the target every time. How come you always succeed?" The bachelor answered: "You must rub some blood on your hand. Look at my hand!" He held out his hand covered with blood. Thereupon the married man asked: "But where will I get blood?" The bachelor replied: "That you have to get from your own body, preferably from between your legs. Look closely how I do it!" He reached down between his legs with his forearm and quickly pulled back the palm of his hand close to his genitals; this hand he held under the other man's eyes and it was actually completely covered with <pb n="151"/>blood. Earlier the bachelor had secretly smeared fresh cormorant blood between his legs. Thereupon the married man promised: "I'll do the same thing." Cautiously he gave himself a few light scratches and wailed at once: "Oh, but it hurts!" The bachelor laughed and urged him on: "You must scratch more strongly. Bring your hand down once quickly and hard past your genitals, then you won't feel the pain!" The other actually seized his genitals with all his might and pulled them off completely. A terrible pain set in and much blood flowed. He died soon afterward. The bachelor who had caused all this laughed scornfully. He said to himself: "Now you'll certainly hit the mark with your sling!" Since the married man was now dead he took the latter's beautiful wife. 
