NSA010294
The áiapux<note>The large otter, Lutra felina (Gusinde 1937:536; cf. ibid., p. 1277, fig. 94).</note> lived in the same hut with his five brothers-in-law. But the five brothers-in-law did not get along with him too well; they constantly mocked and played nasty tricks on him. In the beginning the áiapux did not realize this at all. But when his five brothers-in-law continued to ridicule him, he finally became aware that they were making him the object of their horseplay. He became really furious and said to himself: "Something is wrong between me and my brothers-in-law! They're making fun of me in a rude way!" Then he considered what to do to them. 
Furiously one day he left his hut; he wanted to run away and take a full measure of revenge on his brothers-in-law. He went south, walking far and long, until he came to a projecting rocky point against which the surf beats strongly and the waves build up to mountains. From this point one could clearly see the hut that he had just left, and where his five brothers-in-law were still sitting. In this place he now quickly built a hut for himself. Then he made a signal fire as though a whale were beached there. His five brothers-in-law noticed the signal at once and said to themselves: "The áiapux went south. It must be he who made the fire. That will stand us in good stead, there must be a whale over there!" Then they said to the youngest brother: "You're the youngest: go and see what's there." So the youngest put on his fur coat and left. 
Meanwhile the áiapux had cleaned all the ground around his hut. Then he carried off a lot of sand so that the path to the entrance of his hut rose steeply; finally he poured water on the path to make it very slippery. When the youngest of the brothers got close he looked around everywhere but failed to see any trace of a whale. From some distance he also looked into the hut but no whale blubber or meat was to be seen there either. Then he said to himself: "How is it that I can't find anything? I see no trace here of a whale!" Now the áiapux called him <pb n="71"/>from his hut: "Come in here, my brother-in-law!" When the latter began to walk up the short path it was so slick that he slipped and fell. As he was lying flat on the ground the áiapux raised his harpoon and killed him on the spot. Then he dragged the body up to the hut and threw it to the side where it could not be seen. 
Soon afterward there was another fire signal to fool the other brothers into believing that the two of them were having a feast. The brothers noticed the fire immediately and said to themselves: "Our youngest brother has not come back yet and the two are again making a fire. It would be best if the second youngest of us went to see what's really going on there!" This brother got up without delay and went to the hut of the áiapux. As he got closer he looked around but did not notice any sign of a whale. He approached the hut and looked inside, but there were no signs of a fresh whale there, either. The áiapux called to him from inside: "Just come in, we'll talk here. I notice you're looking for a whale! But first join me in here!" Then this brother-in-law, too, walked up the steep, slick path. Just as he was about to bend down in front of the entrance he slipped and fell. In this instant the áiapux threw his harpoon at him from inside the hut so that he fell dead on the spot. Again the áiapux was very pleased. This body, too, he threw to the side, saying to himself: "That's the way I'm going to take revenge on all of those who ridiculed me!" 
Not long after that he again lit a fire and quickly smothered it so that a thick cloud of smoke rose into the air. The other three brothers noticed it and said: "How can it be that neither of our brothers comes back? They must be calling us!" They told the third youngest brother: "Now it's your turn; go there and see what's really going on!" He left at once. He, too, looked around on that cliff without noticing any sign of a whale. Finally the áiapux called him from his hut: "You, my brother-in- law, come into my hut!" And the brother-in-law went closer. But as he bent down to enter, he slipped on the treacherous ground and fell. At once the áiapux killed him, too, with his harpoon and threw the body to the side. 
Again the áiapux made a big fire and quickly put it out so that a thick cloud of smoke went up. The eldest brother said to the other: "I can't explain to myself what's really going on there: Three of our brothers have already gone over, and none of them has come back! Maybe they're having a big feast over there? You go now and come back soon with our brothers." Thus the fourth brother went to the hut of the áiapux. The latter called him forward. As he went to enter the hut he likewise slipped and was killed. The áiapux threw the body to <pb n="72"/>the side. Full of satisfaction he said to himself: "Four of my brothers-in- law have already paid with their lives for having ridiculed me; so now there's only one of them left!" 
He made another signal fire. The eldest of the brothers noticed that and said to himself: "Again a fire, yet none of my brothers has come back? Now I'll take my weapons and see for myself what's really going on!" He suspected something bad for he remembered how rudely all five had earlier made fun of their brother-in-law. He reached the place and looked around but found no trace of a whale. So he said to himself: "There was no whale beached here, hence something evil must have happened to my brothers!" He approached the hut of the áiapux. The latter called to him: "Well, my brother-in-law, have you finally come? Just enter my hut!" The brother-in-law thought: "He must have lured my brothers into his hut and killed them in there!" Therefore he answered the áiapux: "Oh, I like it better out here; you come out for a while and tell me about my brothers, who have kept me waiting so long!" To this the áiapux replied from within: "I don't like it out there; you come inside!" Finally the eldest brother said: "All right then, I'll come." He rushed toward the hut but from the rear, and quickly pulled out a few stakes to let himself in. Then to his horror he saw the bodies of his brothers lying one on top of the other. In a rage he shouted: "Now I'll take revenge on you!" He immediately forced his way in with a cudgel and cut off the áiapux s hands and feet; then he killed him. 
Therefore even today the áiapux lives in holes under the ground. He comes out but rarely and then only when nobody can see him; otherwise he keeps himself hidden. He is after other animals, especially dogs, and is also an enemy of people. He behaves badly toward everybody. All his limbs have remained short since then. 
