NSA010303
<note>See also Dabbene 1902:66; Martial 1882-1883:213.</note> 
Near the Wéakuf-rock<note>Located on the west coast of Isla Navarino, near the mouth of the Rio Douglas.</note> there once lived a powerful sea lion, extremely wild and dangerous. Whenever a canoe came near, it would <pb n="97"/>throw itself upon it and shatter it; it would kill all the people inside, carry them to shore, and eat them. Many canoes had been destroyed this way, and many people had perished. The relatives of all those who had been killed and eaten by the sea lion often wondered: "Where can our relatives be? They haven't come back for a long time!" But nobody knew that they had been attacked and killed by that powerful sea lion. 
As time passed great grief had come over many people because they had lost their relatives. Then it became evident to clever little Omóra<note>The Tierra del Fuego hummingbird, Sephanoides sephaniodes.</note> that all those canoes must have been lost in the same manner, for not one had returned and not a single person had saved himself. He said to himself: "What can be going on over there since not even one canoe has come back? Many have gone to that region but no one has come back!" He climbed a hill and fixed his eyes on a canoe that had just set off for that place. As the canoe approached the Wéakuf-rock he saw to his horror a powerful sea lion rise up. It threw itself upon the canoe, broke it to pieces, and carried all its occupants ashore. Here the animal slowly devoured them all. Then Omóra said very sadly: "So it is this sea lion who has killed and eaten all our people!" Disconsolate, he returned to the camp and told the people exactly what he had just seen. And so they all put on mourning paint. 
Little Omóra was very clever. He knew how to make excellent weapons; he made the most beautiful harpoons and the strongest slings. He began now to make some new weapons; he expended much effort on a sling. He could hardly wait to try it out; more than anything he wanted to know how efficient his new sling was. He gave it a try. The sling turned out to be so effective that every stone he threw split a whole tree trunk. That fully satisfied him. 
He called four women. They pushed his canoe down from the beach into the water. Then he loaded his weapons into it, got in, and, taking the four women with him, quickly departed. All the women were to paddle strenuously so that they would advance quickly. He himself rested during the journey. As they approached the Wéakuf-rock the powerful sea lion got up and slowly swam toward the canoe. Omóra took his sling and threw a stone. It squeezed out one of the sea lion's eyes. He followed right away with a second stone, and this one blinded the sea lion's other eye. Now the animal was totally blind. The sea lion opened its large mouth and roared loudly. Omóra was soon ready with his sling; in violent haste he threw one stone after another. Then he picked up his bow and arrows. He shot off a strong arrow that penetrated the very center of the sea lion's heart. Bleeding and fatally wounded, the sea lion barely made it to shore. It dragged itself up on <pb n="98"/>the beach and reached its rock only with difficulty. There the sea lion turned into stone,<note>From a distance the rough outline of this rock looks like a sea lion lying down.</note> which can still be seen today.<note>The similarity of this story to the preceding one has been pointed out (Gusinde 1937:1214). In both the hero, i.e., the little hummingbird, is the actual liberator of a large group of people, for which his extraordinary skill qualified him.</note> 
