NSA010310
There once lived a woman here who always gathered berries for herself in alien territory,<note>This expression means: outside the territory of the group to which her husband belonged. Her behavior was contrary to custom and common law.</note> because in the region where her husband <pb n="120"/>lived there grew no šanamáim<note>This noun applies primarily to the small light-red berries of the Pernettya pumila, a Myrtacea (Gusinde 1937:556, fig. 67), but is sometimes also used for the larger berries of the Pernettya mucronata (ibid., p. 121, fig. 12).</note> at all. That was Léxuwakipa.<note>The ibis, Theristicus melanopis, known as "bandurria," which plays the main role also in narratives 6 and 7.</note> She was in mourning at that time. One evening when many people had gathered once more for the mourning ceremony she started to speak and complained loudly: "How I'd like to be in the region where my own closest relatives<note>Because of her marriage she had exchanged her own family's territory for that of her husband, as demanded by the current rule of exogamy (ibid., p. 653).</note> live! There are many amáim; we all like them very much." Then she continued to sing and speak but repeated these words several times.<note>An allusion to the free expression of opinions and unrestrained discussion that is allowed everybody participating in the mourning ceremony (ibid., p. 1131).</note> 
A number of men had also come to the hut for the mourning gathering. One of them began to speak and, referring to Léxuwakipa's words, said sympathetically: "If there are lots of berries in your home territory we'll send a few men there to bring back as many as they can carry!" Then he continued to sing and chant in his sorrow. After the people had ended their ceremony they extinguished the fire and each returned to his hut. 
The following day Léxuwakipa herself set off all alone in the direction where her family lived. When she reached the hut of her relatives she entered and said: "How are you? The Hítokuwinišináala<note>The bandurria invented this name herself in order to deceive and mislead her relatives.</note> have sent me here. I'm supposed to gather lots of berries and bring them back, for, you see, there are no berries at all there!" The relatives were happy that the woman had once more come to visit. Immediately they wanted to help her. Soon a few people left to collect many amáim. They filled a big bag with púxel [in the eastern dialect; uškúlempi in the western dialect; the Selknam say páxal],<note>The big brass-beetle, Carabus auratus, favorite food of the ibis. It is said that this beetle bores a hole in the shell of bird eggs, crawls in, and eats the entire contents. Its presence is quickly noticed through the very unpleasant odor which it gives off to keep its enemies away.</note> for these animals are Léxuwakipa's amáim. At the same time she herself had gone out with other women to gather the real berries. With these she filled her little basket barely half full, much too little for all the people who had sent her there. But the other women gathered púxel and filled a bag to the brim with them. They gave it to Léxuwakipa and she started home with the bag and the basket. 
<pb n="121"/>When she reached her husband's hut, where his relatives were waiting, she gave all the people amáim from the basket that was half full. But the bag with púxel she hid in the hut; these she wanted to eat secretly herself. The people said in disappointment: "But how stingy this woman is; she gave us only a few berries! Yet she was bragging and showing off to us before: 'Where my family lives there are lots of amáim!' What a selfish woman!" When the quiet night had fallen and Léxuwakipa thought that nobody was watching her, she brought the bag out from its hiding place and stuffed one amáim after the other into her mouth. They were her amáim, that is [they were actually] púxel. But every time she bit into a púxel the people in the neighboring huts heard the cracking of something between her teeth. They soon realized what was going on and called to one another: "What a miserable woman Léxuwakipa is. Just listen: all night long she eats amáim by herself! Indeed, one can clearly hear it crack all the time between her teeth." 
Soon afterward the people again felt a strong desire for šanamáim. They discussed how they might lure Léxuwakipa out of her hut and take away her bag full of amáim, to distribute them among themselves. Her husband and a few other men turned to her and said: "The tide is all the way out. Why don't you go to the beach and quickly gather some big mussels for us!" She said: "I'll go at once." She got up, took her little basket, and hurried down to the beach which was far away. 
When she had gone a good distance one of the men said: "Now it's time for us to take revenge on that selfish, stingy Léxuwakipa!" Without further ado he hurried into her hut and searched it thoroughly. Finally he discovered the big bag. As he was about to open it he saw a púxel sitting on top. At first he thought that the beetle had simply gotten there by chance. But when he opened the bag and looked inside he discovered a great number of these beetles busily moving around. Alarmed and disgusted by the repulsive odor from all the púxel he quickly closed the bag and pushed it back into its hiding place. He rushed out and set fire to the hut from the outside. Soon the flames were raging high. From the beach Léxuwakipa became aware of this, but she had to watch how the flames rapidly consumed her house.<note>This part essentially agrees with the Selknam story about the great albatross (Gusinde 1931:657; Wilbert 1975:118). The role of the selfish woman in the latter is played by the lapwing, Belonopterus chilensis, which is not far from Theristicus melanopis in the natural order. The Selknam regard both birds as sisters (Gusinde 1951:661).</note> Sadly she exclaimed: "Oh poor me, all my things are burning up now. What a pity that I also lose all the amáim!" 
<pb n="122"/>Léxuwakipa came running from the beach, sighing all the way: "How sorry I am about all the amáim!" Another woman heard her and replied: "We don't eat such stinking things and don't offer them to anybody: we eat something better!" The one who thus exclaimed was Aiakélum, daughter of the epáiači.<note>The bottle-nosed whale or springer, Orca magellanica (Gusinde 1937:37).</note> Smartly she added: "My relatives eat only excellent and very tasty things, namely oil from whales and seals. But the kind of stinking little animals that are your favorite food we don't even touch. Besides, my family always has an abundance of oil. Where I live there is always much of this delicious stuff around!" Old Epáiači, Aiakélum's father, was standing close by and heard his daughter's words; he immediately added: "Well, we're all going to stay here for a while. I want you to go at once to your family's territory and fetch whatever is stored in your kinfoik's ample oil supply!" Aiakélum's husband [one also says Aiakélem]<note>The younger bottle-nosed whales, which form small schools.</note> was little Lefkóiya;<note>The little wood owl, Glaucidium nanum.</note> he agreed to his wife's journey. For these people had all gotten together here for a big mourning ceremony and with the intention of staying for several days. Meanwhile, the woman was to undertake the journey to her home. 
Léxuwakipa's hut was still burning in the place where the people had gathered for their mourning songs. When they saw the flames they stopped singing, fetched a lot of water, and put out the fire. Then they all returned to their huts. 
The following morning the weather was beautiful. Aiakélum quickly got into her canoe and left. With her went little Čámux,<note>The large wren, Zonotrichia canicapilla. In addition there exists in the Cape Horn area a second, smaller species, Troglodytes hornensis.</note> her son. The territory of her family was far away and she had to travel long. Because there were always many whales there, the lakúma<note>This dangerous water-spirit is described more closely in Gusinde 1937:1285.</note> also went there. But this woman was very clever and cunning. Every time a lakúma approached her canoe she addressed it in a friendly tone: "Are you all right, my dear grandfather?" The lakúma heard these friendly words and allowed her to proceed without hurting her in the least. Soon another lakúma came toward her, and to this one, too, she called in a friendly voice: "Are you all right, my dear grandfather?" Then it likewise let her continue unmolested. In this way she managed to get through the infested waters without harm. At last she reached her home. She brought her canoe up to the shore so that her little son could comfortably get ashore. But every spot on the beach, even the smallest, <pb n="123"/>was covered with oil and grease so that the little boy slipped at every step; he could not put one foot forward without falling. The mother saw this. In a loud voice she called from the canoe: "This is my son. Let him walk up the beach!" Whereupon little Čámux no longer slipped but comfortably reached the top. Meanwhile the mother pushed away from the beach and at some distance tied the canoe to a bunch of seaweed; then she swam to the beach, walked up, and entered her family's hut with her little son. Her relatives were very happy when they saw Aiakélum. They sat down by the fire and talked for a long time. 
Among the huts there were some with people who did not belong to Aiakélum's family. Húruf,<note>The powerful storm bird, Macronectes gigantea, conspicuous for its long, narrow wings.</note> too, had by chance settled here. Normally he dwells far out on the open sea. When he heard that a woman had come from far away he became curious and said: "I'll take a look at her at once. Who can she be?" He entered the hut where Aiakélum was sitting. From the moment he saw her he liked her immensely; her figure entranced him and he soon started giving her amorous looks. The woman responded to him in the same way. Surreptitiously Húruf moved nearer and nearer until he was sitting very close to Aiakélum. Night had long since fallen and it was dark all around them. They had been waiting for this. The woman was sitting there with her legs pulled up [in a squatting position]. Húruf gave her his hand. The woman took the man's hand and placed it on her sexual organs. After inserting his finger into her vagina the man played around there for a rather long time. His very long finger excited the woman so much that moisture flowed from her vagina. But the man continued to excite her in this way, which gave him very great pleasure. In this manner the two sat close together until far into the night. Only then did Húruf go back to his hut. It satisfied him greatly to have aroused Aiakélum so strongly, for now he was sure that she would take him for her husband. Aiakélum, in turn, could not sleep all night for sheer satisfaction. She said to herself: "Since I now must take Húruf for my husband I'll ask my family here for a large amount of oil and blubber. First I'll take this to my old husband and his kin; then I'll come right back again. My son shall stay here so that my husband will let me return soon. From now on I want to live with Húruf who loves me very much!" 
The next morning this woman shrewdly and inconspicuously informed Húruf of her plan. To her folks she said: "Give me lots of oil and blubber; I want to take it to my husband and his family. You see, there they lack all that." They willingly gave her as much as she <pb n="124"/>wanted. She loaded everything into her canoe, then got in herself and pushed off at once. But little Čámux she left behind. 
No sooner had she reached her husband's hut than she distributed the large amount of blubber and oil that she had brought. All the people were most contented. Then she informed her husband: "I'd like to stay here only for a few days; my family insists on seeing me again soon. Also, I had to leave little Čámux there since I wanted to bring the canoe filled with oil and blubber." Her husband replied: "All right, visit your family again. But come back soon and bring our child!" Quickly she got into her canoe and traveled to the region where her relatives lived. She went immediately to meet Húruf, and she has been living with him ever since. Today one still sees his long finger which he had inserted into the woman's vagina in order to arouse her desire.<note>In connection with this story I was told: The big storm bird has a long, narrow wing. That wing is his very long finger with which he had excited the woman to sexual pleasure, after inserting it into her vagina. It is a well-known rule, known to the people, that if a man approaches a woman and excites her in this way they have to get married, to their own shame and as a warning to others. Boys and girls, who sometimes are informed by old people of the relationship of the sexes with each other, at the right age and on a suitable occasion, are told of that rule. But in practice it would be the individual circumstances of the two persons that counted. If the man who had thus committed an offense with a woman had no particular desire to marry her, and if she for her part likewise withdrew, the offense would remain hidden and neither of them would worry about the law. If the man insisted upon having the woman but she wanted to stay away from him and keep the incident secret, another way would remain open to the man to reach his goal. If his efforts to influence her were in vain, he would confide in a close friend of hers and reveal to this woman that he had committed an offense with the other one and had touched her in the manner described above and that she had responded to his forwardness in the way mentioned thereby demonstrating how easily she was excited by him. After that the relatives of the woman try to influence her by every means, and earnestly and reproachfully tell her that after such an occurrence it simply is the custom for the woman in question to marry the man. If she finally has no way out she stops resisting and marries the man. But if she already is married, which is most often the case, she has to leave her present husband. The latter usually agrees without resistance and resigns himself to the separation, for in this he sees the best solution for a relationship which after all is no longer sincere. Still, it may happen that the legitimate husband opposes his wife's intention of moving over to his rival. If he does not want to give her up she continues to stay with him and he watches her particularly carefully. If this husband should go away for a few days and leave his wife behind, he takes for granted that she runs to her lover's hut and sleeps with him. The husband and the other people really no longer find this an offense, for the two of them would belong together anyway <pb n="125"/>as married people if the legitimate husband had not opposed their marriage. But they are allowed to be together in this way only when the legitimate husband is absent. The latter, however, correctly judging his wife's innermost feelings, will deliberately never let it happen that she is left alone where her lover lives. Therefore this last-mentioned concession probably never means anything in reality.</note> 
