NSA010280
<pb n="34"/>The elder Yoálox had once received an exquisitely made harpoon from his elder sister. It gave him good service. The weapon never missed its mark. Its owner always hit his quarry and it always returned to his hand. 
One day the elder Yoálox came back from the hunt loaded down with a huge sea lion. But although he had killed the animal at the first throw, he had broken and lost his harpoon. Therefore the elder Yoálox told his younger brother: "How convenient it would be if I had a harpoon that would never break or get lost! That is actually how it should be: a sea lion ought to fall dead at the first throw and the weapon instantly return to the hand of the hunter. That way we'd save ourselves and the people a great deal of toil and trouble, and we would not have to work so painstakingly at making harpoons. Everyone could obtain sea lion fat and meat safely and with ease, instead of having to muster so much cunning and effort to kill a sea lion." The younger Yoálox listened to all this. But he resolutely opposed his elder brother's proposition answering angrily: "It must never be the way you suggest! It is good for the people to work and exert themselves. It is very useful that everybody makes weapons with his own hands; this [these benefits] would be lost if we gave each and every man a harpoon of the kind you propose. It is also good that a clumsy, careless hunter breaks and loses his harpoon. May the animal escape if an awkward and unskilled man throws the harpoon badly. Everyone should make an effort and exert himself!" 
The elder Yoálox could not object to these words and that is why, to this day, a clumsy hunter breaks and loses his harpoon if he has not learned how to hurl it properly and with good aim; or why, if the hunter has not thrown it forcefully enough, the harpoon remains stuck <pb n="35"/>superficially in the sea lion's back and the animal swims off with it. He who has lost his harpoon this way must simply trouble himself to make another one. 
Later, Yoálox-tárnuxipa gave the elder of the two Yoálox still other weapons and tools, namely, the firm leather thong made from the hide of a sea lion, úkeša; the sharp knife made of mussel shell; the strong bone wedge, íla, with a stone for hammerhead; the strong sling, šáfina; the long snare-rod, akámuš, for making snares; and the compound snare-line, úfka, to catch birds; and finally all the other implements. His pleasure over all these things was great, because whenever he employed them he was successful. Therefore he wished nothing more ardently than that all these tools should neither break nor wear out; that they should neither slip from their owner's hand nor become lost in any other way. It was his intention to save people the trouble of having to make tools again and again. 
The brother objected quite vehemently to the elder Yoálox's fine plans. He wanted to make people work. Every clumsy and awkward hunter should ruin and lose his weapons so that he learn how to be skillful; tools should wear out so as to force everybody to make new ones. That way everybody would be kept busy. The younger Yoálox insisted on his plan, and to this day nobody is spared from toiling painstakingly and laboriously over his weapons and tools, constantly making new ones, and treating them with care. A man is and remains dependent upon them on the hunt and in his daily occupations; in no way can he do without them. 
