NSA010272
<pb n="21"/>Old Akáinix was a magnificent-looking man. He knew how to paint himself much more attractively than the rest of the men. He belonged to a privileged family; handsome Lem is his brother, Hanuxéakuxipa is his wife. She, too, is extraordinarily beautiful; after all, she is his wife. Akáinix also has several sisters, all of them very pretty, clever, and cunning. Once Akáinix proved before all the people that he was also a very capable yékamuš [shaman]. 
One day the sisters were again playing kína in Yáiaašága. Old Akáinix was allowed to go into the big kína-hut. He knew all about the women's secret doings so that they allowed him in. Here Akáinix's sisters were entertaining themselves by playing dead; they wanted to see how long they could remain still and without breathing, as it is with dead people. The women intended to thoroughly fool their relatives [at home] with this act and frighten them just for fun. 
The sisters had been busy with these experiments for a long time. But despite trying their utmost, they had not succeeded at holding their breath very long. Some other time when the girls were once again experimenting with this old Akáinix approached the kína-hut. He was the oldest among all his brothers and sisters. When his youngest sister saw him coming, she right away informed the others, saying: "We had better stop our experiments and efforts at once; our brother is quite close and might discover what we are doing." But by then Akáinix was already standing in the kína-hut. He asked his sisters: "What are you doing here?" "Nothing in particular," they said. "As usual we are <pb n="22"/>devoting ourselves to our songs and our work." Akáinix replied: "What you are saying is not true at all. I know perfectly well what you were just doing here: you were all trying to appear motionless, as though dead, and to go without breathing for a long period of time. But you did not succeed. I know that very well. Now then, I myself shall show you how to do it right!" Akáinix knew that the girls planned to fool their relatives who lived in the south, and that they wanted to amuse themselves by purposely frightening them. They were the only ones who had come from the south and were participating in the kína in order to hide their real intentions. Since Akáinix saw through all that he offered to help his sisters. 
So Akáinix lay down on the ground and stretched out; he became very still, soon stopped breathing, and lay there motionless, exactly like a dead person. His sisters, watching it all, admitted: "Indeed, our brother is really good at this; he is lying there just like a corpse!" Akáinix was a capable yékamuš. 
The kína festival came to an end and all the participants left the Big Hut. Each family headed toward its homeland. Akáinix and his sisters also got into their canoe and headed south where their relatives lived. They had to travel several days because it was far away. But before reaching the huts of their folks, the travelers made a brief stop. Akáinix remained there; he stretched out on the ground and feigned death. His wife Hanuxéakuxipa and all his sisters painted their bodies black all over as a sign of deep mourning. Thus [prepared] they entered the hut of their relatives. In great dismay the latter immediately asked: "What has become of Akáinix? Why do you come in mourning paint?" The girls replied sadly: "Our brother has died just now, a short distance away from here. We left him lying there, close by that hut. That's why we wear the paint of mourning!" Upon these words from the desolate girls several men promptly rose and went to where old Akáinix was lying. They soon brought him back and laid him down in their hut. All the time Akáinix was acting as though truly dead. In view of this the others prepared themselves for a yamalašemóina. All the relatives gathered, wept loudly, and sang for several days. 
Meanwhile a few amorous men approached Akáinix's wife and sisters. They began flirting with them because these women were extremely beautiful. The men caressed them and slept with them. Although Akáinix was lying there completely motionless he watched closely everything that went on. Several days went by. Then finally the enamored men began pressuring the girls to become their wives. They had been playing around with them long enough. Akáinix's wife and sisters had yielded to everything, knowing that Akáinix was not dead <pb n="23"/>and would take full revenge. The men behaved more frankly all the time as though the women already belonged to them as wives. 
One day, because there was no meat left in the huts, the amorous men went hunting. They wanted to look for cormorants on the nearby rocks. Their [female] relatives, the kímoa and lúrux, the šékuš and wípatux, stayed behind with Akáinix's wife and sisters. 
Once the men had gone far enough from the hut, Akáinix arose unnoticed and, taking a different way, ran after them. He was the first to reach the cliffs where the men were going to hunt cormorants. Here, Akáinix startled and scared all the birds. Large numbers of them flew up, circled in the air for some time, and then flew far out over the sea. Akáinix hid nearby. From far away the hunters noticed all the birds flying up from the cliffs. They said: "No doubt some man is running around there. The cormorants fly up, circle in the air, go up and down, and finally fly far out to sea. Who might the man be?" As the hunters got close to the place the cormorants were hovering far out over the waves. 
Suddenly, Akáinix came out of his hidingplace and confronted the men. Coming face to face with Akáinix so abruptly they were very startled. Instantly they knew what would now happen to them. Akáinix said: "I suppose you've come to hunt cormorants? The birds have all flown away. Only over there, not far from here, you can still find many of them standing close together. Just step into the water without fear: it is not deep!" The men obeyed without delay as though they had lost all ability to think; they were so overcome by fear and horror that they no longer knew what they were doing. They pushed ahead into the water so as to get close to the cormorants. But no sooner had the men gone out to where they could move only with difficulty than Akáinix skillfully swung his powerful sling and killed them all. That is how he avenged himself, his wife, and his sisters. 
Akáinix now hurried back to the hut, but he did not reveal that he had killed all those men. Some time later, though, their relatives asked: "Why are our men staying out so long? Did you perhaps see them over there near the cliffs?" Akáinix replied: "Of course I saw them. They went into the sea to reach the cormorants that were swimming far out there. Be patient, they'll soon be back!" Again the women waited for a long time but the men failed to return. After a while they became convinced that Akáinix had killed every one of them. They were overcome with rage; they began to accuse Akáinix openly and to attack him fiercely. He became indignant and began to defend himself. Soon a violent struggle was in full progress between Akáinix and the men present. Being outnumbered Akáinix was at a disadvantage. The men <pb n="24"/>seized him firmly but were unable to kill him. For a long time they sought to strangle him and to break his neck. But they failed despite their great effort, because Akáinix was a powerful yékamuš. They succeeded only in bending his neck and his long back way down. So that since then he has been unable to stand up completely straight. In defense of his father, Yái, the son of Akáinix, also took part in the wrestling. The men, therefore, throttled him just as they did his father and they also bent his spine. From that day on Akáinix and his son Yái<note>The second, pale rainbow that sometimes accompanies the bright one.</note> have remained crooked and bent over.<note>The Selknam also know this unambiguous myth motif (Wilbert 1975:52n).</note> The relatives of those amorous men whom Akáinix had killed also carried something away from the wrestling bout: they soiled themselves with ími while trying to choke Akáinix. Being a yékamuš, Akáinix had been painted red all over, as is customary for a yékamuš who has died. Even today these birds<note>They were neither specified by name nor designated in any other way. The story presupposes the general state of affairs after the great revolution.</note> carry spots of red color on their feathers. 
