NSA010278
<pb n="31"/>Once the elder Yoálox had collected many small stones and was amusing himself by hitting them against one another. Among them there was also a good šewáli. When he struck this stone against another a small spark came out. Surprised at this he struck the stones together several times and each time sparks came out. Hurriedly, he took a handful of very dry down. These he put on the ground. Once more he began to draw a spark from the šewáli. He stood in such a way, striking in a certain direction, that the spark sprang into the down. The down began to glow, caught fire, and soon a small flame leaped up. Yoálox quickly went to fetch kindling and wood and put it on the flame. Thus a big fire flared up. It even warmed him pleasantly. Yoálox found it delightful to sit close to it during the day and to sleep beside it at night. The fire turned out to be useful for many other things too: it helped roast the meat, dry the hides, and bend or straighten sticks and pieces of bark. 
Overjoyed, the elder Yoálox exclaimed: "Fire is really extremely pleasant and most useful. Let's keep it burning all the time so that it will never go out. Once lit, may it always keep burning by itself so that the people may use it without trouble. They should not have to make a special effort to light it anew every time [in every emergency] or constantly feed it wood!" Hearing this the younger Yoálox became very upset. He did not at all like what his elder brother was planning and quickly responded: "I disagree with your wish. It is much better that <pb n="32"/>the people have to trouble themselves. Everyone should make an honest effort for the fire and guard it carefully. May everyone light the fire again when he has let it go out. People must work!" He immediately seized a long stick, poked around with it in the embers, and scattered the smoldering pieces of wood. Soon the fire went out altogether, and since then every fire will go out if it is not constantly and carefully tended. Thus everyone is obliged to work. 
Yoálox taught the people how to light a fire with the šewáli, how to fan and maintain it. Since then, whoever lets his fire go out has to light it again with considerable effort. According to Yoálox's wish all people are forced to tend their fire with constant care; he who fails to do so has his fire go out and must painstakingly rekindle and maintain a new one. 
