NSA010332
<note>See also Koppers 1924:200-201.</note> 
Once there was a blind man who lived with his wife. Each slept on his own bed, separated from the other by the fire. One night a hánnuš sneaked into the hut, approached the woman, and forced her to copulate. The old man noticed faint noises as the hánnuš left and asked his wife: "What is that strange rustling sound?" She replied: "There's nothing here; don't get so upset for nothing!" In due time, however, the old man realized that his wife was pregnant. Indeed, she soon gave birth to a son. The blind man did not love this son at all; he knew that the boy did not come from him. And then the son was an unusual creature, too. In just a few days he grew a lot bigger; he was able to walk and climb, and worked diligently for his parents almost immediately. He especially helped the blind man a lot, because he believed him to be his own father. 
Occasionally when the boy walked through the forest he would see strange signs on the trees here and there. He often wondered: "Where might these signs have come from? My blind father surely hasn't put <pb n="182"/>them there." One day as he spoke these words a hánnuš looked out from behind a tree and said in a friendly tone: "It is I who put those signs there!" The little boy was dumbstruck for he was afraid of the hánnuš. The latter continued: "So my own son is afraid of me?" The little boy wondered at this and ran back to the hut. The words of the hánnuš had hurt him, so he asked his mother: "It isn't really possible that I have two fathers, is it?" His blind father also heard his question; angrily he explained to the little boy that one night his mother had slept with a hánnuš. But the mother denied this and assured him: "It isn't so. Only in my dreams did a hánnuš once come to my bed!" The small boy continued to work diligently for the blind old man, but he did not love the hánnuš who was his real father. 
One day the little boy was busy again in the forest. His father, the hánnuš, approached him, took him into his arms and carried him to the place where his large hánnuš family lived. It was a big cave. Here many hánnuš were gathered, but all were strange-looking creatures: some had four eyes, others only one; some had no heads, others had their faces on their chests; these had only one leg, those only one arm, and others were deformed in other ways. Now all came running to stare at the stranger. After some time the old hánnuš led his son back to the place in the forest whence he had taken him. But the small boy was very uneasy and later told the Yamana in great detail how he had fared among the hánnuš people. He continued working diligently for the blind old man. 
