NSA010288
The mother of the two Yoálox had finally grown old and fragile; her strength dwindled more and more from one day to the next. Weak and tired, she lay there until she was finally unable to move. When all strength had left her the two Yoálox carried her outside the hut and placed her in a good spot on the grass where the warm sun could shine on her. 
The elder Yoálox sat down beside his mother without ever taking his eyes off her. Though he kept his eyes constantly turned on her she did not utter a sound. It made him unspeakably sad that his mother was lying there completely motionless, but he did not disturb her profound sleep, firmly hoping that she would soon get up again. 
Because the elder Yoálox kept his eyes for a long time on his sleeping mother, and because he kept looking at her intensely and unswervingly, she finally began to move again. She opened her eyes and moved a little; sleep gradually left her. Slowly she regained consciousness from her deep sleep. At first she hardly stirred at all, for her totally exhausted state improved so gradually that it was barely noticeable. But for the elder Yoálox that was enough of a sign. He was beside himself with joy. Quickly he ran into the hut to inform his younger brother "Listen and rejoice," he said. "Our mother has awakened from her profound sleep. Very slowly she has begun to move. I am confident she will soon rise again!" These words put the younger Yoálox into a very bad mood and he sharply disagreed with his brother: "It must not come to that! Our mother is asleep because she is very old and totally decrepit. She must sleep now forever!" This is what actually happened: the mother soon stopped stirring and did not get up. The elder Yoálox left the hut and went to the place where his mother lay; he looked at her closely. And indeed, she lay there totally stiff. Again, as he had done before, he turned his fixed stare on her for a long time, but this time she did not move. She remained motionless: she was truly dead. 
That was the first death. Since then all people must die.<note>Noteworthy are several agreements on this point between the Yamana and Selknam. Among the latter it is the elder brother who was prevented by his younger brother from arising again from the sleep of old age; through this, actual death was introduced (Gusinde 1931:588). | In Gusinde 1931:589, note 28, I pointed out that the Selknam prefer to use the phrase "elder Kwányip" instead of the name. The Yamana do not have a name at all for the "elder Yoálox."</note> The younger Yoálox wanted it that way.<note>Toward the end of the story much bitterness and sadness were evident on the faces of the many people present at the thought that everyone sooner or later inevitably will die. Without saying a word all went away and silently slipped into their own huts. Sometimes the thought of dying very much depresses every Yamana.</note> 
