NSA010314
On the island of Egóngo there once lived an old married couple. They had five sons, all of whom were married. One time the sons had gone far out to sea with their families to fish and hunt. The old parents remained behind all alone in their hut. Not for a long time had those five families left the island and their old parents. Their old mother was very advanced in years. She was so frail and weak that she could no longer hope for children at her old age. Her husband, who was somewhat older, knew that very well. Nevertheless, whether it was that he wanted to joke, or that he still did not want to give up all hope, every time before sleeping with his wife he took a fresh máku flower<note>Shrub common to Tierra del Fuego, Embothrium coccineum; cf. Gusinde 1937:702, fig. 78.</note> and inserted it into her vagina. 
He then immediately lay down on the woman to have intercourse with her. He did this so that the máku flower would remain long in the woman's vagina. And indeed, after some time both realized that the old woman was pregnant. Soon she gave birth to a son. Such a handsome, beautiful child the old people had never seen before. They were ecstatic and beside themselves with joy, for the little boy really seemed as pretty and shiny pink as the máku flower.<note>In addition to a well-proportioned body, a pink, transparent skin suggesting the luster of blood is considered a mark of great physical beauty by the Yamana. To emphasize this they refer, by way of comparison, to the large scarlet Embothrium flower, which completely satisfies their sense of beauty. They often say, "This child resembles a máku flower and is as lovely as one," by which they mean that they very much like the child; cf. Gusinde 1937:701.</note> 
This little son of theirs grew unusually quickly and in the process became even more handsome. To the delight of his old parents he soon began to play. The little boy also began to speak surprisingly early and <pb n="133"/>he asked his mother for all kinds of things. He amused himself by catching flies and mosquitoes, butterflies and beetles, dragonflies and others of this order [Hymenoptera]. Each of these animals he brought to his mother and asked what it was called. The mother gave each animal a name; her little son heard it and repeated it several times. Ever since each animal bears that name. The little boy had grown considerably, and as a result was able to catch larger animals. He went to the beach and into the forest, where he caught first the small birds, later bigger ones, and finally the very largest. He brought them all to his mother and asked her what they were called. The old mother was extremely happy that her little son seemed so active and skillful; she gave each bird a name and this she told her son. He repeated the name and remembered it. Every bird bears that name to this day. Meanwhile the boy continued to grow and he showed that he was strong and brave enough also to hunt large animals. Indeed he soon killed a young sea lion, then an old, heavy sea lion, even foxes, guanacos, and dolphins; once he even killed a whale. Each of these animals he brought to his mother and asked what it was called. Every time the mother was very happy and she gave each animal a name which it bears until this day. 
Now Lušwuléwa [a composite name, from luš = red, like the máku flower = wonderfully beautiful; and from wuléwa, the general word for boy; accordingly: "wonder child"] was big enough to go hunting regularly. He brought large amounts of meat to the hut all the time and as a result his old parents were provided with lots of food. Since they were unable to eat everything that Lušwuléwa carried home they soon began to take care of the surplus; they wanted to preserve it in good condition for a later time. Lušwuléwa himself blew up many a big sea lion stomach and let it dry in the air; then he filled it with meat. In this manner he accumulated large supplies. For here in Egóngo there were many animals, and he was really a diligent and skillful hunter. 
After a time the five brothers and their families returned from the long journey; they had missed their old parents very much and wanted to see them. When they had gotten close to the island a violent storm blew up and prevented them from continuing. It kept them out there on the open sea and blew so strongly that they could not move from the spot. Finally the women had to tie their canoes to thick bunches of seaweed so that the wind would not blow them out to sea. 
One morning when Lušwuléwa had left the hut as usual to go hunting, he spotted those canoes out there, anchored to bunches of seaweed far from the island; they had to be tied down like that or the wind would have driven them out to the open sea. He said to himself: "I suppose they have already been sitting there for a few days. Their <pb n="134"/>provisions must have gone out by now!" Without further delay he considered how he might help them. Then a thought occurred to him: "I'm sure it would be a good idea if I let those people have a well-filled sea lion stomach. If I put the stomach on the water in the right way, it may be that the current will carry it to those canoes. Then they'll have something to eat and won't die of hunger before they can continue." Instantly he ran to the hut and informed his old father: "I think my brothers are sitting in those canoes out there with their families. There's a very strong wind blowing, and for that reason they have tied their canoes to thick bunches of seaweed. I'd like to help them by letting a filled sea lion stomach drift to them with the current so that they'll get something to eat." The old man replied: "That's very good of you. Do what seems best to you. It won't be in vain if those people out there get a well-filled sea lion stomach." 
Lušwuléwa at once hurried down to the beach, took a thick club, and put it on the water, carefully positioned so that the current would push it. He wanted to experiment first to make sure that the current would actually carry the club to those canoes. He followed the club with his eyes, and indeed, despite the strong wind and the high waves the club floated directly out to the open sea, precisely to the spot where the canoes were anchored. Two women happened to be sitting in the bow of their canoes trying their best to catch a few fish as all the people were terribly hungry. Suddenly the club struck very loudly against the canoe and they said to each other: "That thing out there, what could it be, and what's beating so hard against our canoe?" They leaned even farther out over the gunwale and noticed the thick club bumping against it; they wondered greatly at this. At last they took the club and threw it over the other side so that it would no longer beat against the canoe. Lušwuléwa was watching all their movements from the island and joyfully said to himself: "So that heavy club floated exactly to where the canoes are. Then I suppose a well-filled sea lion stomach will also reach them if I place it properly on the water." 
He ran at once to his hut and selected a big, well-filled sea lion stomach. This he carried to the beach and positioned it precisely on the water so that the current took it immediately. The big stomach drifted off; wind and wave pushed it forward rapidly and it drifted directly toward the boats. Soon it reached there and struck violently against one of the canoes. The woman who was sitting inside became frightened at this strong blow, looked overboard, and saw to her special joy the big, well-filled sea lion stomach. She quickly seized it and tried to lift it. But she was not strong enough, as it was much too heavy. She called two men. They worked hard at it, and together they finally <pb n="135"/>managed to lift the heavy, well-filled stomach into the canoe. All the people breathed a deep sigh of relief when they saw the large amount of meat; they had been suffering severely from hunger but now they had lots of food at their disposal. Although they were astonished, trying to figure out how such a big and well-filled sea lion stomach could have come to their canoes, they began to eat at once as they were very hungry, and soon stopped wondering where the stomach might have come from. So now there was much commotion out there in the canoes. From his island Lušwuléwa was watching the constant movements of the people, and very contentedly he told himself: "Then the big stomach got there all right. How those people must have thrown themselves on the meat, for they must have been very hungry!" 
When the people out there had appeased the worst of their hunger they began to talk and said happily: "With all this meat we'll manage for a couple of days; we no longer have to make an effort to catch fish here. Perhaps the weather will soon improve and then we'll reach shore. But where did this big, well-filled sea lion stomach really come from? Who might have put it on the current in such a way that it reached our canoes and bumped into them? Our old father no longer has the strength to gather such amounts of meat, and even less to put such a big, full, sea lion stomach on the water; he is not able to work at all, so this big stomach certainly can't come from him! Maybe some other man happens to be staying in our father's hut. But who could that be? It would have to be a skilled hunter who could accumulate so much meat; he must also be a strong man capable of carrying this heavy load to the beach. Who might that be? Moreover, this big stomach must come from the island where our father lives, for all the meat is fresh and very well preserved!" They talked about this and that while they ate. They filled themselves completely. After some time the eldest of the brothers promised: "As soon as the weather permits I'd like to try to go over to the island where our father lives. I'll ask him how he is and who put this sea lion stomach on the water so that it bumped into our canoe. I don't doubt that this big stomach was meant for us all along." To this the others replied: "All right, do that. We are also curious to know how our father is and what man is staying with him in the hut." 
The weather improved the following day with the headwind no longer blowing so strongly. The eldest of the brothers and his wife got into their canoe and left. Although they had to paddle hard they managed to keep course on the island. As they approached the island little Lušwuléwa happened to be running along the beach. He called to his father: "A canoe is approaching our island and will soon reach land. Maybe it's my brother coming here with his family." His father replied: <pb n="136"/>"That's possible." The little boy fled into the forest and hid there; after all, he was extremely handsome and for that reason did not want to be seen. Shortly after this the elder brother reached land; he and his wife left the canoe and went to his father's hut. He reported how things had gone for him, his four brothers, and their families on the long trip, how they were held back out there on the return trip by bad weather, and how a big, well-filled sea lion stomach came floating to the canoes, saving them from starvation. He also assured him with great excitement that all were wondering very much who had let them have the stomach. With laughter his old father replied: "Listen, my son, I'll explain everything to you: you have one more brother! Although you haven't seen him yet it was he who let you have the big sea lion stomach." Curiously he pressed his father: "How is that possible? Tell me, where's the boy hiding?" The father answered: "Your brother has gone into the forest again and won't return until late at night." Now the two, father and son, sat down by the fire and talked for a long time. When it had grown dark they hung a piece of hide before the entrance of the hut so as to close it; they lay down and soon fell asleep. Not until the night was far advanced did little Lušwuléwa return to the hut. In order not to wake anybody up he avoided the hut's entrance and cautiously crawled in from the side, lightly lifting a loose piece of hide. He tiptoed quietly to his bed and lay down between his father and mother. Then he crawled under a long and wide piece of fur which completely covered him. Nothing could be seen of him, not even his feet. But while he was asleep he unwittingly stirred and pushed one foot slightly out from underneath the cover. 
Very early the next morning the eldest brother got up from his bed. He blew on the low fire and put a few logs on it. Then he noticed that from beneath the wide cover between his mother and father a child's foot was visible which he had not noticed the night before when he went to bed. Instantly it occurred to him that it had to be his youngest brother and he said to himself: "I'm sure he did not come home from the forest until late and stretched out on his bed here very quietly without waking anybody." Quite enchanted with that pretty little foot he thought to himself: "What a lovely little foot my new brother has! How beautiful his whole body must be! So it was he who gave us the big sea lion stomach. We certainly can be proud of such a brother!" While he was attending to the fire in the hut so that it would give a lot of heat he quietly woke his wife and said: "Look at that pretty little foot sticking out from under the cover. That must be our youngest brother my father talked about yesterday." The woman looked at that delicate food and she, too, was quite delighted. She whispered to her <pb n="137"/>husband: "What a magnificent boy that must be whose foot alone is so enchanting!" Once more both stretched out on their bed. But the woman could no longer fall asleep for although she had only gotten to see his pretty foot she was thinking with great pleasure of her little brother-in-law. Later, the parents rose from their bed and ate a few mussels. But that woman was unable to either eat or talk, thinking only of her handsome brother-in-law. 
The sun had long been up when little Lušwuléwa got up from his bed. Now the eldest brother and his wife saw his whole body. The woman carried on as though crazed at the sight of the exceedingly beautiful body of her little brother-in-law. She could not take her eyes off him; all day long she could eat nothing at all and at night she tossed restlessly on her bed, unable to sleep. She was quite beside herself since looking at the beautiful boy. 
The following day the eldest brother finally had to say goodbye to his parents; after all, the other families were waiting for him. Again he left his father's hut and together he and his wife got into the canoe. They went out to the open sea and soon reached the place where the families in the other canoes were eagerly awaiting their return. The eldest brother told them: "Listen to this, you're going to be very surprised: we've got one more brother! Who would have guessed that, for our parents are already very old." Then all the others looked in astonishment and cried joyfully: "Is that really true? And this little brother of ours is supposed to have sent us the big sea lion stomach? No, that's quite impossible." The wife of the eldest brother said: "It's really that way! I have one more little brother-in-law. But he's so ugly, deformed, and twisted that you feel sick just looking at him; if you sit next to him you lose your appetite. The parents are just too old. What a repulsive, ugly child! I keep seeing him before my eyes!" That is what the woman said; she wanted to deceive all the other relatives, perhaps to dissuade them from going to that island. Secretly she was already planning to take the handsome brother-in-law for her husband and begin having intercourse with him; she did not want to be prevented from doing so by the other women. Meanwhile the latter were discussing what they had just learned. They said: "Since our little brother-in-law is so ugly and deformed we had better not go there so as not to lose our appetite." The brothers also discussed the matter: "How did it happen that we were given one more little brother now? Our parents are really much too old; that must be why he turned out so ugly and malformed!" In saying this, they shook their heads angrily. While they were listening to what the women were saying one of the men finally cried: "However it may be, even if our youngest brother <pb n="138"/>really is so deformed and repulsive that simply can't be changed now. Soon I'll go over to the island anyway; at least I want to see our old parents." Eventually the other brothers agreed with him and said: "It would even be better if all of us would go together to the island to see how our parents are." They promptly untied their canoes from the seaweed and paddled over to the island. They disembarked and set off for their parents' hut. Little Lušwuléwa happened to be there just then. When they saw him the brothers were beside themselves with surprise; in their desire the women behaved as though mad, so crazed with love were they: their brother-in-law was exceedingly handsome and well shaped, and as magnificent as a máku flower! Instantly they saw through the cunning intention behind the false account of the eldest brother's wife. 
Each of these women soon felt a violent desire to get together secretly with her handsome brother-in-law; each was crazy with love for him. But none of them succeeded in meeting him unnoticed in order to yield to her overwhelming desire. Each revealed her secret longing to another, and thus all five exchanged their intentions; soon each knew what was on the others' minds. Finally they spoke more openly among themselves and made a plan together to lure litttle Lušwuléwa away and amuse themselves with him. They had to try several times, but finally they managed to persuade the boy and take him along with them without the knowledge of his parents. Upon leaving the hut they only mentioned briefly: "We're going to the beach to gather mussels." But on the beach far away from the hut nothing was farther from their minds than gathering mussels. They put the beautiful child in their midst and began to play with him. He himself willingly surrendered to their lascivious doings. One after the other took his member and held it for a rather long time in her hand. Then they lay down on the youth one by one, repeating this several times. Satisfied by this love play the women gathered in the sea to cool off their voluptuous excitement in the cold water. Then Lušwuléwa followed them and they immediately touched one another under the water with their hands. 
While they were busy romping around like this Lušwuléwa became especially attached to one of the women but grew increasingly indifferent toward the other four. They gradually noticed this, too, but still continued to play with him. When he and the preferred woman went farther and farther away from them in the water in order to be all alone, their jealousy erupted. Finally Lušwuléwa gave himself to that woman alone and wanted nothing more to do with the others. This they could not stand and they became furious. Together they went toward him and began splashing water on him. Slowly they pushed <pb n="139"/>him farther out into the sea. They splashed him so heavily and constantly that finally he was no longer able to remain standing. Indeed he fell and drowned. Those four extremely jealous women did not permit only one sister-in-law to satisfy her desire with the handsome boy. So Lušwuléwa died because he was so handsome and well proportioned. Late at night the women returned to the hut, but without Lušwuléwa. Only much later did his parents find out that he had drowned. They were furious with those women. To have lost their pretty child made them unspeakably sad. They cried bitterly and could not reconcile themselves to having to go on living without their beautiful, clever son. These two old parents died very soon from overwhelming grief.<note>Old Julia who lives on the Wollaston Islands told me this story which is related in the same way all over the south. It is also known in the middle and western regions, although slightly changed; this version mentions only four married brothers, and accordingly Lušwuléwa is the fifth and youngest. The many animals that he killed and brought home he did not put before his mother, as related above, but before his father, and the latter gave each its name. Both myths I heard on separate occasions and completely independently of each other; I have to thank old Mary, who lives in the west, for the second version. The main themes in this myth return in an unadulterated form in the "Story of Emienpoot" which is told among the Selknam (Gusinde 1931:661; Wilbert 1975:123).</note> 
