NSA010324
<pb n="163"/>Once there was a son-in-law who lived in the hut of his father-in-law; he had taken both of the old man's daughters for his wives. But this son-in-law did not treat his father-in-law too respectfully. Whenever morning dawned and a beautiful day announced its arrival the old man would say joyfully "Yaléakumáala!" Upon hearing this the son-in-law would mumble: "Taléakumáala!"<note>Literal translation: 'A lovely day' [is to be expected], and [it will be] 'a cross-eyed day.' Both forms together have a pleasant ring.</note> He would whisper it quickly so that the old man could not understand it clearly and would fail to notice that his son-in-law was deliberately making fun of him. For a long time the son-in-law kept on in this very way always greeting his old father-in-law with the same words. 
Finally one day the younger daughter said to her father: "Listen, father. You always say: 'Yaléakumáala.' But your son-in-law answers mockingly: 'Taléakumáala,' thereby making fun of you!" When he heard this the old man became furious. He immediately started considering how to take full revenge on this disrespectful son-in-law. He lay down and fell asleep. In his dreams he wanted to make a whale drift ashore and place himself inside it in order to punish his son-in-law. He was a great yékamuš. For that reason he succeeded: in his dream he killed a whale; at once it drifted close to the camp and he placed himself inside it. 
The following morning the son-in-law got up from his bed. As he looked out of the hut he saw many dášalux<note>The large albatross, Diomedea melanophrys, from the sea.</note> hovering in the air. He said to himself: "Where did all these dášalux come from? There must be a dead whale floating around near here, for there are many birds. I'll go at once and see what it can be!" He went back into his hut and told his wives everything. They replied: "Good, you go and see whether it really is a whale floating around nearby!" He ran out and climbed a small hill. From there he saw how a whale was drifting closer and closer toward land, with many birds hovering above it in the air. These birds <pb n="164"/>were talking; he heard them saying: "Just come closer, my brother-in-law; after all, the old father-in-law is 'cross-eyed.' What a 'lovely day,' my son-in-law. Certainly, my 'cross-eyed' father-in-law!" They were talking thus like human beings. This amazed him; he looked around but could not see anyone. He climbed down from the hill because the whale was coming closer. He heard the conversation loud and clear now. Then he said to himself: "There must be people here for I can hear their voices! But I don't see anyone. Where can they be? Whence may they have come? Where are they hiding? One only hears their conversation!" He continued walking and was now very close to the whale. Here, too, he saw nothing but birds and said to himself: "Where are the people that I hear talking around here? I only see birds everywhere!" 
He took his knife and cut himself a big piece of blubber from the whale. This he loaded on his shoulders, quickly turned around and walked toward his hut. But strange: on the way this piece of blubber grew larger and larger; it finally grew so large and so heavy that he had to cut it in half; it had become so big that he was no longer able to carry it. One half he put in the swampy water and the other half he again loaded on his shoulder. But after a short time this piece, too, grew very large; soon he was no longer able to continue with this one, either. Again he divided it into two parts and put one half of it in the swampy water; the other half he continued to carry. But also this half grew very large, so that again he had to make two pieces out of it. All this repeated itself five times, and then once more. At last he reached his hut. 
His family soon arrived and all ate of the pieces of blubber. During the meal he told them where he had found the whale, how he had cut a big piece of blubber and loaded it on his shoulder, how this piece had grown bigger and bigger on the way, that he had to cut it in half, and all this six times. He also informed them where in the swampy water he had buried the other halves. Everyone was very happy over this and said: "Tomorrow we'll go where the whale is lying!" 
The next morning many people went to that place and set up their huts close to the whale. Each cut a big piece of blubber for himself and ate with relish. It was a long time since they had eaten blubber. The little grandson of the old yékamuš had crawled up on the whale and plunged his knife deeply into it. Then his grandfather, who was sitting inside, called to him in a low voice: "Little grandson, don't stab too deeply!" Although the little boy heard the voice and was very surprised he, nevertheless, continued to carve. Then he heard the same voice again: "Little grandson, please don't cut so deeply!" Now he became very frightened and ran to his mother; he told her everything. But she instructed him not to say anything and to stay in the hut. 
<pb n="165"/>The people remained in this place for some time and ate well. Then they went back to their former camp. The two daughters of the old yékamuš began to paint themselves and put on their feather ornaments as a sign of grief. They thought their old father had died. The others, too, painted themselves, and all gathered for the yamalašemóina. When they began to cry and to chant, all the pieces of blubber started to move; they came alive again and moved toward the whale on the beach; each piece put itself in place all by itself and soon the whale had been pieced together again. Also the son-in-law felt himself drawn toward the whale as though by a strong power; he was lifted up on the back of the whale against his will. But now the old yékamuš came out of the whale, because the animal began to live and move again; it slid down the beach into the water and took with it the son-in-law who was sitting on its back. 
Even today one can still see the son-in-law riding on the back of the whale. But those pieces of blubber that the son-in-law put into the swampy water on his way to the camp became bigger and bigger, exactly obeying the wish of the old yékamuš. Whenever the old man wanted it, his two daughters went to fetch one piece after the other. Accordingly, they had blubber from that big whale for a very long time.<note>The so-called whale in this story is actually a dolphin, which is characterized by a long, high dorsal fin. This is supposed to indicate the disrespectful son-in-law. The basic plot and individual motifs coincide with those used in the Selknam story "The Revenge of Elankáiyink" (Gusinde 1931:639; Wilbert 1975:92).</note> 
