NSA010336
A long time ago we men took the kína away from the women. Way up in the north of the Isla Grande, in the region of Yaiyióxan, the women performed the first kína. Who knows whether they were Selknam women or not? Perhaps in those days the Selknam were not yet as different from us Yamana as they obviously are today. On their wanderings from the north down here the women were looking for Tánuwa everywhere, but could not find her. In vain did they try in the various places where they built their Big Hut. Finally they came to Yáiaašága. They liked it there and decided to stay. They immediately lied to all the men, pretending finally to have found Tánuwa there. They made noise, screaming, jumping, and dancing excitedly. The men were to believe that all this was done by Tánuwa; however, that was not the case. The only thing that Tánuwa really caused is the large heaps of stones, boulders, and rubble which can still be seen west of Ušuáia. It was Tánuwa who lifted, stirred, and moved those masses. For if she herself had raved as wildly and waved her arms as excitedly as those women did in the kína-hut, the entire area would have been destroyed. All the noise and frenzy came from the women themselves, who made the men believe that it was Tánuwa raging so fiercely. 
One day when Lem was returning home from the hunt he overheard two girls by a lagoon. While he was hiding among the tall reeds the girls were talking to each other: "Let's practice some more." So saying they trilled over and over again: "Lo lo lo lo ..." Finally they said: "Now we can do it just like the women in the kína-hut!" As they were about to stop practicing Lem stood up in his hiding place and walked toward them. He was angry and spoke to them harshly and reproachfully: "So then it's our own women who are deceiving us men with <pb n="192"/>their singing! Nor do the ušamína<note>A certain type of kína-spirit. Bridges (1933:113) says about this identification: "Certain men or beings supposed to be the sons of a certain kölapäša, who acted parts in the ceena drama." Here, as in the other version of this myth, the reader is again referred to the kalampáša-performance (Gusinde 1937:1330, 1340).</note> descend from above into the kína-hut! That's something I shall tell the men about immediately!" The girls were trembling with fear and confusion, but Lem ordered them: "Now tell me everything!" Helplessly they revealed to him: "In the kína-hut there is nobody but our women; they alone are the ones who do everything. The men, however, are deceived and deluded." Lem was satisfied with that and assured the girls: "All right, I'll save you two. Stay hidden here by this lagoon, then you'll escape with your lives!" When Lem had reached the camp he threw the guanaco he had hunted angrily on the ground and said aloud: "As far as the meat is concerned the women are cheating me and all the men!" These words frightened Téšurkipa, who hurried to the kína-hut and told the women: "Lem must have found out something [about our deception]!" The women were overcome with terror and noisily prepared a spirit appearance [the kalampáša mátu]. But the men looked out from under their fur covers and clearly recognized their painted and masked wives. 
Soon the great battle began in Yáiaašága. The men drove the women out of the kína-hut and the latter all turned into animals. The men threw harpoons or spears at the women; that's why animals have tails.<note>In the first version of this myth the same Mašemikens said that it was the women who had thrown various weapons after the running men, which are still recognizable today as tails.</note> The man attacking the čilawáiakipa had no spear handy, so he used his sling and threw the next best thing at her, a winter pepper tree with twigs and leaves. That is why the fox has a bushy tail. The yékeslef<note>The squid [Loligo subulata]. Probably this is also what Bridges (1933:646) means by "a species of cuttlefish with a hard bill or horn." On the pointed end of its long, cigarshaped body the cuttle fish mentioned above has two broad triangular fins. These are taken to be the "mask" which it supposedly wore at the time.</note> ran away without taking off her mask. She took refuge in the water and is still wearing the mask. The haféim<note>A trunkfish, about as long as a hand, with short thorns all over its body.</note> did the same, and to this day one can recognize the mask that she wore on that occasion on her head. Likewise the tepérakipa.<note>The shape of the mouth of this ursine seal, Arctocephalus australis (Gusinde 1937: 41), is taken to be a mask that it once wore.</note> The wémarkipa [Larus glaucodes] was hit by many arrows, which can be seen from the many dark lines and dots on her wings. The ašóula [the small grampus, Pseudorca crassidens] happened to be away when the battle began. Returning later to this place he noticed how few people there were and said: "Something must have been going on here. How I would like to have helped in this fight!" He pulled a glowing club from the big fire, and while doing so burned himself under his arms and in other places: these are the light-colored spots that he has had ever since. 
<pb n="193"/>The big spears and harpoons that were thrown by our men at that time can still be seen lying by the lagoon in Yáiaašága, although overgrown by high grass. Everyone who goes there notices them. Among them are huge boulders, also thrown by our men against the women on that occasion. In the big battle all the women who had pretended kína were turned into animals - land animals, birds, and sea animals. At the same time, Lem, too, left this earth, for as a servant to the women he had also been involved in the kína, as it were, since he had to provide them with meat. His brother Akáinix and the latter's wife Hánuxa also went with him up to the sky, as did several others, and they all became stars. Since then the men rule in the kína-hut, and no woman may approach it without permission, much less join in the meeting. 
