NSA010318
Here in the west there once lived a bachelor who always had lots of firewood in his hut. Not far away he had found a low stone slab with sharp edges standing upright. He knocked sticks and tree trunks against the edges to split them. Some distance from him lived a married man who always had trouble splitting and cutting wood. One day he came to the place where the bachelor was busy splitting wood. The bachelor took a stick and broke it. It looked as though he was beating the stick against his knee, for he had placed himself so that both his legs were around the sharp stone slab, concealing it; when he struck he bent one leg somewhat and thus the stick split on the slab. The married man stood a little apart from the bachelor and asked: "How can you split the sticks on your own knee?" The bachelor replied laughingly: "As you can see, it's very easy. If I strike hard enough any stick splits, no matter how thick it is. One only has to approach it with courage. You try it, too!" The man tried at once and struck his knee. He gave a scream and complained: "But it hurts terribly!" The bachelor laughed and tried to calm him down: "But that's impossible! Watch how I'm standing. Just strike hard!" Again the bachelor took a thick stick and brought it down against the sharp stone slab which he had hidden between his legs. Just as the stick came down he inconspicuously bent one leg and the stick split on the stone slab. "So from this you can see that it is possible!" laughed the bachelor. "You only have to hit hard, then your knees don't hurt. Courage now! Begin bravely!" The married man once again took a stick and struck it against his knee. It hurt terribly but the stick did not split. He wailed loudly with pain after each blow. As though displeased the bachelor shouted to him: "Come on now, bring your arm far back and strike with all your might!" Finally the other swung a thick stick with all his strength and brought it down on both his knees. They were smashed terribly and much blood flowed; he lay there and soon died. The cunning bachelor burst into loud laughter. He mocked the man, saying scornfully: "All right, then! Just go on splitting wood on your knees!" The bachelor then hurried to that man's hut and told the wife everything that had just happened. They had long been meeting as lovers; now both were happy that the husband was no longer alive. They moved close together and immediately had intercourse. Soon the dead man's son came to the hut. When he saw the bachelor on his mother's bed he became furious and thrust his harpoon right through him. The bachelor died immediately. This is how the son avenged his father. 
