NSA010316
Once five brothers were living together in the same hut with their brother-in-law. The latter was a malevolent, evil person who, whenever <pb n="143"/>he had a chance, caused his brothers-in-law every conceivable harm. Finally he grew disgusted with them. He wanted to kill them. One day he invited the youngest of the five brothers to accompany him up a steep cliff to catch cormorants. When they reached the cliff the evil brother-in-law lit a big fire. While the other went off to gather firewood the evil man put much wood on the embers and among it hid a thick hašamáif,<note>A bulging growth of wooden tissue on the beech tree branch, caused by the Cyttaria fungus; cf. p. 141 n. 94.</note> covering it well to get it red hot. After some time the young brother-in-law came back and threw down his burden of wood. The hašamáif was now glowing brightly; the fire was close to the edge of the cliff. The malevolent man said to his brother-in-law: "Why don't you climb down this wall and see whether any cormorants are sitting there." The other one climbed down, not suspecting what his malevolent brother-in-law was planning. When he was standing exactly below the fire this evil person pushed the burning hašamáif over the edge of the rock so that it fell right on the head of his young brother-in-law. The latter died instantly and his body rolled down to the beach. The murderer went back to his hut. He pretended to be very sad, and the others thought that their youngest brother had met with an accident on the cliff because of carelessness. 
Not long afterward the brother-in-law invited the second youngest of the five brothers: "Would you like to accompany me to that cliff? I'm going to hunt for cormorants there." The other at once got up and went with him. When they reached the top the evil man again lit a big fire near the edge of the cliff. When the other was not looking he pushed a thick hašamáif into the embers and covered it with firewood. When it was completely red hot the evil man said to his brother-in-law: "Why don't you try to climb down this cliff a ways. I'm sure there are some cormorants sitting in the holes there." Unsuspectingly the young man climbed down. When he was standing exactly below the fire that bad person pushed the glowing hašamáif over the edge of the cliff. It fell right on the head of his brother-in-law killing him instantly; the body rolled down to the beach. That bad man now went home to his hut, crying loudly and pretending to be very sad. The others thought their second youngest brother had met with an accident because of carelessness. 
After some time the evil man invited the third of the five brothers to accompany him to the cliff. The latter immediately went with him. There this bad person killed his unsuspecting brother-in-law in the same way as he had killed his two younger brothers. Again he came back crying sadly so that also the two surviving brothers-in-law became very <pb n="144"/>sad. Not long afterward he went with the second eldest of the five brothers to that rock wall and killed him in the same manner. 
Thus there was only the eldest brother left. One day the evil man said to him: "Would you like to accompany me to that cliff to hunt cormorants?" His brother-in-law replied: "Oh, yes, we can go at once." The two of them left. But the eldest brother suspected something, for how could all four of his brothers have met with accidents so quickly, one after the other? When the two reached the cliff they made a fire. After some time the malevolent man told his brother-in-aw: "Why don't you climb down that cliff? I'm sure there are cormorants sitting in those holes there. Get them." But the other replied: "That looks very dangerous to me. I wonder if this isn't the place where somebody killed my four brothers?" In the fire a thick hašamáif was already glowing. That man had secretly hidden it there. Again the eldest brother repeated: "No, I won't go there, it's much too dangerous for me." The other replied: "How worried you are. There's absolutely no danger. Come on, go." The eldest brother said: "You go on and stand there first; then you'll see how dangerous it is." Finally that awful man climbed down. When he was standing below the fire the other pushed the glowing hašamáif so that it fell over the edge of the cliff. He called out a warning: "Hašamáif kakáta šúen, álum; there's a hašamáif coming, my brother-in-law!" But the latter could not get out of the way in time; the hašamáif fell right on his head and killed him on the spot. 
The kéšpix<note>Apparently their souls.</note> of the five dead people got together and built a canoe. In it they went to their nephew's hut. They called him out and pretended to be real people still. The nephew suspected nothing for he had not yet heard that the five men had died. His name was Alaánama.<note>The sea leopard, Lobodon carcinophagus, rare in the Cape Horn region.</note> The men invited him into their canoe and he got in. They went to a distant island to hunt birds. They were lucky there, and while the five kéšpix hunted, Alaánama cut up the birds they had killed. He also made many kéti.<note>A kind of sausage. In Gusinde 1937:584 it is shown how it is made.</note> In the sausages he made for his uncles he used the entrails and the contents of the guts; in the kéti he was going to eat himself, however, he used only good parts. The uncles, too, had in their turn made a few sausages while on the island. These they gave to their nephew who pretended to eat them. But he only put the ones he had made for himself into his mouth, and gave his uncles the kéti he had made expressly for them. All five ate them, failing to notice how much offal they were swallowing at the same time. Then they all went back again to the nephew's hut. There the kéšpix now <pb n="145"/>lived with Alaánama. Every time they went bird hunting the nephew made the sausages in the same way and his uncles did not notice anything. 
After a long time the ghosts left, each in a different direction. They left their nephew alone in the canoe. At his leisure he looked for a thick cudgel and put it in the canoe. When the ghosts returned later they asked him: "Where were you?" To this he replied: "I went very far. Look at this cudgel. I brought it from where I was; you can find this wood only in that far away place." Now all six got into their canoe and went to another island. When they were close to shore they hit such strong surf that their canoe went completely to pieces. They lost no time making a new one, and no sooner had they finished it than the five kéšpix flew off, each in his particular direction. When they returned later they asked their nephew again: "Where have you been in the meantime?" He replied: "I was very far away." Then he gave his uncles those bad sausages, the kind he had always made for them. They ate them and noticed nothing. Soon all six left that place too and went to another island. When they got there a violent surf came up and their canoe was broken. So again they had to build a new one. They had hardly finished when the nephew said plaintively to his uncles: "Now it's about time for me to return to my mother's hut. She has a lovely voice and I love to listen to it. Besides, I'm sure my mother is very worried about me; she may even believe me dead." The ghosts told him: "All right, let's go to your mother's hut." They loaded much meat and blubber into their canoe, as well as a few sea lions they had not yet cut up, and with this they set off. 
Soon they were near the beach where the nephew's mother had her hut. They tied the canoe to a thick Macrocystis stem. Alaánama secretly hid a fat sea lion in this bunch of seaweed. He put it aside for his own use, for he was planning to stay with his mother from now on and let his uncles travel on alone. All six got out by the shore. When they walked up to the hut they heard the lovely voice of their nephew's mother. They approached very slowly. The five kéšpix went and stood very close to the entrance and looked into the hut, but the nephew stayed behind. He said to himself: "Those two that are standing right in the middle of the entrance I'm going to shove into the hut with a strong push." He ran quickly and gave the two ghosts in front such a violent push that they were shoved inside. He himself hurried in after them and held them firmly. The other three kéšpix flew up and left. In the hut Alaánama took some dog dung, human urine and feces, and rubbed it into the faces of the ghosts. They both were behaving like crazy, and Alaánama wanted to calm them down this way so that they might slowly become people again. Over several days the nephew treated his <pb n="146"/>uncles in this strange manner and also gave them urine to drink.<note>In fact, even very recently a person who was mentally disturbed or mentally not normal was treated in exactly this way by the other people, above all by his relatives. They would pour a large quantity of urine into his mouth, which he had to swallow. Through this they wanted to restore his mental equilibrium.</note> Thereupon the two kéšpix calmed down and by and by became human beings.<note>By this is meant that their behavior again became somewhat rational and human.</note> Now the nephew watched them less carefully and allowed them more freedom; he even permitted them to leave the hut. One day when they had left to look for amáim, berries, they again became as mentally disturbed as before. They turned into real kéšpix and flew away. Their nephew soon became aware of this and returned to the hut alone, crying and lamenting. He cried again and again: "Oh woe, now my two uncles have left forever!"<note>The first part of this story agrees in its essential features with what old Julia who lives in the south told me in 1920 (Gusinde 1937:1250). Not until 1923 did old William who is from the east tell me the complete story above. | The peculiarity of the second part of this story is demonstrated by the fact that it is solely in this story that actual souls appear, returning to those everyday circumstances and to those people which they had left at death. Also the behavior of the souls themselves is not that of mentally normal people.</note> 
