NSA010304
Old Kiwágu<note>The very common large sea gull, Larus dominicanus.</note> was a widow who had a lovely daughter. Ketéla<note>The large gerfalcon, Polyborus tharus.</note> fell in love with both women at the same time and soon took them into his hut. And so the three of them lived together [as married people]. <pb n="99"/>Ketéla was very skillful, particularly at making beautiful harpoons. He usually sat on a mound near his hut and worked on his weapons. Whenever Kiwágu went out in her canoe after fish and crabs he accompanied her; his younger wife remained alone in the hut. 
Two wasénim<note>The tufted cormorant, Phalacrocorax gaimardi.</note> who were brothers had fallen very much in love with Kiwágu's young daughter. One day when Ketéla had gone out with his older wife to catch crabs, the two wasénim came secretly to his hut. The young woman was sitting all by herself. From the outset they flattered her in every way, became more and more importunate, and finally demanded crudely that she sleep with them. She refused and staunchly fended them off. Later when Ketéla came back to the hut with his older wife the two wasénim slunk away unobserved. They considered a new plan and were determined to carry the beautiful woman off by force; should she not let them have their way, they would take revenge on her. 
One day when the young woman was sitting in her hut all alone, the two wasénim stealthily sneaked up close. One of them addressed her harshly: "Will you sleep with us today or do you still refuse?" She replied resolutely: "I don't want to! You are very repulsive to me, you cross-eyed wasénim!" These words hurt him deeply. He sat down near the fire with his back to the beautiful woman. He now pushed a small stone into the embers to heat it. The other wasénim threatened the young woman: "All right, if you don't obey us and don't yield to our demands, we'll simply carry you off with us by force!" Upset, she answered: "I won't do it. I don't like you, either, you cross-eyed wasénim. Get out of this hut!" He, too, became furious. He seized the young woman, threw her to the ground, pulled her legs apart, and held her down that way. Meanwhile the other wasénim, using fire tongs, took hold of the small, oblong stone which had been heating up in the embers, and inserted it into her vagina as though it were a penis. And thus the two wasénim took their revenge. The young woman died instantly. They said scornfully: "Since you didn't want to yield to our desire you shall not be Ketéla's wife, either!" They covered the dead woman with several furs and left the hut. 
On the way they met Kiwágu who was just returning from fishing. In her presence the two wasénim pretended to be very sad. "Why are you so serious and sad?" the old woman asked. They replied: "We come from your hut. We went there to look at your daughter. Well, just keep her to yourself, we say; we have no desire for her! We were planning to have some fun with her but she rejected us out of hand and would have <pb n="100"/>nothing to do with us. All right: keep her to yourself! We'll never again go to your hut looking for your daughter!" Kiwágu got the terrible suspicion that the two might even have killed her daughter. She hurriedly pushed her canoe away from the beach and paddled hard until she reached her hut. From the canoe she called to her daughter to come down to the beach with baskets; she was to help unload the crabs and the fish and take them to the hut. But despite her long, loud calls her daughter did not come out of the hut. Finally Kiwágu left her canoe and ran to the hut. When she entered she saw her daughter lying on her bed, covered as though asleep. Kiwágu shouted at her: "Will you finally get up, you lazy bones! How long have you been sleeping here?" She pulled at the hides, but the daughter did not stir. Kiwágu pulled all the hides aside and saw her daughter lying there dead. Smoke was coming from her mouth, for the stone which she had in her vagina was still very hot. Then Kiwágu broke down and wept long and loudly. 
The two wasénim had continued walking and soon had reached the hill where Ketéla was sitting, working on his harpoons. When they were close enough they addressed him in a scornful tone: "Listen, you: just now we wanted to look at your stepdaughter. She would not talk to us, but turned us coldly away. Well, now we don't really need her any more. Keep her for yourself and take good care of her for your sake; we're no longer interested in her!" Thereupon they hit Ketéla over the head with a club, so that to this day his head has remained flat. Ketéla hurried back to his hut. Old Kiwágu was crying loudly so that the women from the neighboring huts came over. She told them everything and the women became very sad. 
Kiwágu had many relatives. The whole family eventually arrived and they prepared themselves for a big yamalašemóina. All their acquaintances and friends came, too, even the two wasénim-murderers. They remained standing at a distance, though, on the cliff of Lašawáia.<note>Located on the west cost of Isla Hoste opposite Molinare.</note> When the crowd that had gathered in the hut caught sight of the two wasénim they flew into a terrible rage. The men seized their slings and wanted to kill them. But they were too far away for the slingstones to reach them. By now all the people had gathered; only little Omóra<note>The hummingbird, Sephanoides sephaniodes, occasionally seen there.</note> was missing. He was the man who was most skilled in the use of the sling; as we know he killed Sínuluwatauinéiwa,<note>Cf. the story about the stone man.</note> even though he was only a little bit of a man and of insignificant appearance. Kuhúrux is closely related to him. Some men said: "Let's call little Omóra; he's <pb n="101"/>excellent at using the sling and will certainly help us out of this awkward situation!" Others found the suggestion ridiculous and said: "How could that tiny man surpass us? None of us was able to fling a stone far enough to reach the two wasénim, so he won't be able to, either!" Other men replied: "Still, Omóra knows how to handle the sling in a very masterly manner. We were convinced of it when he killed the stone man. We should ask him to come at once!" After some discussion they finally sent a messenger to summon Omóra. For all the people were highly indignant that none of the men were able to reach the wasénim and kill them. 
Soon little Omóra arrived. Even so, he was late, for on the way he had been practicing continually. With his sling he first shot a big stone toward the south. When it came down the Molinare Channel opened and Isla Navarino was separated from Isla Hoste. Then he hurled a stone toward the west and this opened the northwestern arm of the Beagle Channel. He shot another stone somewhat to the south of the last one and through this the southwestern arm was opened. Then as he again threw a big stone eastward the long eastern half of the Beagle Channel opened up. He threw still more stones from his sling in all directions and where these stones landed new waterways were formed. That is how the numerous waterways and channels originated, and the many islands. Throwing this way one stone after the other from his sling, he slowly walked on until finally he arrived at the place where all the people were gathered and waiting for him. When Omóra's tiny figure appeared most of those present began to laugh. But then all the people quickly told him why they were in mourning and that they were furious, because the two murderers, the wasénim, had escaped the missiles of any of the men. When Omóra had heard all this, he, too, became enraged. He had only three stones at hand. One of them he now placed in his sling and sent it off; it passed very close to the heads of the two wasénim. Hurriedly he put a second stone in his sling and threw it with great force. It hit one of the wasénim right on the chest so that he fell over and no longer moved. Quickly he also threw the third stone; it hit the other wasénim, so that he died on the spot. All the people marveled at his strength and skill. But they were especially happy that those two murderers had been killed and that they had received their just punishment. After this they all went back to their huts. 
The two murderers, the wasénim, turned into stone and remain lying there in the same place at Lašawáia where little Omóra killed them. One can still see them today. They are the two watauineiwábei, "the two old men," and by that name everybody knows them. 
