NSA010282
<pb n="38"/>A short time later the two Yoálox began manufacturing long harpoon points out of whalebone. The bones of the whale are longer and harder than those of other marine animals, thus penetrating the hunted animal better and deeper. The men attached such a point to a long shaft with thin leather straps. They immediately went hunting to test the weapon. 
A sea lion approached and they hurled the harpoon at it. The animal was not killed, however, but only superficially wounded. It quickly escaped by diving, surfaced soon again, and swam far away from the shore; the light wound had not harmed it at all. The two Yoálox failed to kill even a single sea lion with their harpoon. They did go out several times to hunt, but the animals they hit with their harpoon were only superficially wounded and escaped without any trouble. Each time, the two Yoálox returned home disappointed and empty-handed. They had already lost several harpoons, for whenever a sea lion was hit the harpoon remained loosely stuck in its skin and the animal swam off with it. All their efforts on such hunts remained unsuccessful; the harpoons were useless. 
Disgruntled because of their many unsuccessful efforts, the two Yoálox one day decided to consult their elder sister. They said to her: "Why is it that although our harpoon hits the sea lion and the point penetrates its body it only inflicts an insignificant wound? We never seem to be able to kill it and it therefore never falls into our hands. For many days now we have been returning home without any catch!" <pb n="39"/>Wise and understanding woman that she was, Yoálox-tárnuxipa replied: "Bring me one of your harpoon points; I'd like to take a good look at it." Immediately they fetched a bone point and showed it to her. She held and studied it closely. The piece was indeed very pointed and provided with a peg at the other end suitable for attachment, exactly as on the arrowhead that Yoálox-tárnuxipa had improved. There was no doubt that the harpoon point was securely fixed in the notch at the upper end of the shaft and firmly fastened. But both sides of the long bone point were smooth from top to bottom. So now Yoálox-tárnuxipa worked out a large, pointed barb on one side. After she had succeeded with this she looked at the bone point with great satisfaction. At once she loosened her loincloth [mašakána] and cut off a long leather strap. One end she tied to the lower peg of the bone point, then placed the next part of the leather strap alongside the shaft and fastened it below [the middle by winding it once around the shaft]; the long, free end she rolled up. Next she showed her brothers how to handle this harpoon: the right hand grasps the harpoon approximately at the middle of the shaft and the left hand loosely holds the long, [rolled-up] free end of the leather strap. Then she told them: "Now start testing it!" 
Both Yoálox thanked their sister for improving their harpoon and showing them how to use it. Immediately they left the hut to try out the harpoon on sea lions. They had hardly reached the beach when a powerful animal came swimming by. The younger Yoálox clutched the harpoon exactly as his sister had shown him: when hurling it he held the free end of the thong in his left hand. And indeed, the bone harpoon point penetrated deeply into the sea lion's back. Instantly the animal disappeared below the surface of the water. But it did not get very far, for the long strap had soon been pulled very taut and the stronger the sea lion jerked, the deeper the barbed harpoon point tore the wound. The shaft had become detached from the point but since it was fastened by its lower end to the leather thong it was floating on the surface of the water. By this shaft Yoálox could tell where the sea lion was swimming. The latter ceased tugging so hard on the long line, for the deep wound hurt very much and each jerk was painful. Slowly, the younger Yoálox began pulling in the long line; the shorter it got, the closer the sea lion came to the shore.<note>Here is described in detail the way and fashion in which this big harpoon works and makes for success (Gusinde 1937:474). The explanation underscores the amazing ability and skill of these Fuegian innovators.</note> When it was finally lying on land the elder Yoálox killed it with a cudgel. Thus with this harpoon they had easily and safely caught the first sea lion, and provided themselves with plenty of blubber. 
<pb n="40"/>The two Yoálox were nearly beside themselves with satisfaction at this success. They spent the whole day hunting sea lions and made an exceptionally large catch. Not until evening did they decide to return to the hut. This time they were panting loudly under the heavy load of meat. Overjoyed they told their sister about their great success and explained how quickly they had caught each animal and why this time none had gotten away. 
From this day on the two Yoálox abandoned all their other crafts, for it made them unspeakably happy to hunt sea lions with this harpoon. Later they taught all the men how to use the large harpoon. Since then the Yamana utilize this harpoon with the long leather thong to hunt sea lions. 
