NSA010287
<note>See also Bridges 1948:161-163; Cojazzi 1914:32-33.</note>
The two Yoálox brothers had two other sisters but nobody can remember their names. These girls took particular pleasure in bathing and playing in the waves. Almost every day they spent happily in the water. 
One day a big sea lion approached the girls. He did not frighten them in the least; rather, from the first he acted clearly amorous and offered to play with them. The two sisters found this quite all right; they amused themselves for some time, until eventually the elder one became strongly taken with the sea lion. Surreptitiously they went farther and farther away so that the younger sister could not see what they were doing. Then they fondled each other and played together for a long time below the surface of the water. 
The two sisters always bathed in the same place. Every time they went into the water the big sea lion appeared, too. He came swimming under the surface and approached the elder sister. This was just what she wanted, for she had fallen very much in love with the sea lion. Unobtrusively the two left the other girl; she was not to notice how they gave in to their desire. 
For a long time now they had been meeting for their love play. Then one day the younger sister asked her elder sister: "What is that big black thing that you hide so anxiously with your body? I saw it between your legs. What actually is it?" The elder sister answered evasively: "But what are you thinking of! You can only mean the shadow of my body. There can't be anything else!" The younger sister was not satisfied with this answer and asked again: "It seems strange to me that this black thing is supposed to be your shadow. A shadow is never that solid black. It must be something else!" Upset, the elder sister replied: "I can't understand what you are imagining! When I assure you that it is my shadow, why don't you believe me!" But the younger sister was not to be convinced and answered: "That black thing cannot possibly be your shadow! It would be much too strange to see your shadow only appear in the water and only below your body." Now the elder sister repeated insistently: "Please trust my words. There is nothing here but my shadow." The younger sister realized that further discussion would lead nowhere, so she merely added: "I cannot <pb n="52"/>believe that the black thing is the shadow of your body, even if you assure me again and again!" Nevertheless the two girls continued to go bathing almost every day, and every time the elder sister met the male sea lion. 
The elder sister had now been pregnant for a long time. When her condition was far advanced she finally discussed with the sea lion how to prepare herself. At once he took the pregnant woman on his back and swam to his cave. There he prepared a soft bed and also brought a lot of food. Soon she gave birth to a baby boy. 
The sea lion was tremendously happy over his son. But several days later he was seized with great fear. He said to the girl: "If the Yoálox, your brothers, find out about our forbidden relations, if it becomes known to them that you have given birth to a boy and are staying in my cave, they are going to get into a terrible rage and blame me alone. Then they'll ambush and kill me. I think it best for you to return to your brothers. Tell them how very fond we are of each other; then tell them how amicably we live together and how lively our little son is; ask them if I may live with them." Replied the girl: "Very well, I'll go back to my brothers' hut and tell them everything; I'll ask them if you may live with them." At once she prepared herself to leave. The sea lion took her again on his back and they made headway quickly. 
The two Yoálox had long had a rather good idea of all that had happened and what was going on with their sister. When the sea lion was close enough to the hut of the Yoálox he sent his wife on alone. As for himself he stayed behind with the little boy. Quickly, the woman reached her two brothers' hut just when they were home. She entered and said unabashedly: "How are you, my brothers! My husband, the big sea lion, asks whether he may come to live with you. He would like to be near you, and I would like that, too. But he will only come if you promise not to kill him! He is more than ready to help you in hunting and in all the work, and he'll also be a good brother-in-law to you!" The two Yoálox consented: "You say the sea lion is your husband. All right, he may come; we'll take him into our hut. We promise not to do him any harm; if he behaves well we won't kill him." 
The woman was happy to receive her brothers' consent. Without delay she hurried back to where she had left her husband with the little boy. When she reached the sea lion she told him happily: "I talked to my brothers. They asked me to tell you: since you are now my husband you may come and live with them. They won't do you any harm or kill you as long as you behave well." These words reassured the sea lion; accompanied by his wife and child he set out at once to the hut of the Yoálox. The woman entered first, carrying her child on her back. Just <pb n="53"/>behind her the sea lion, too, tried to enter. But he was too powerful and too bulky to get through the narrow entrance. The two Yoálox had to remove a few stakes first from the doorway; then the sea lion finally forced himself through and came inside. He was extraordinarily large. The two Yoálox showed him and his wife the place opposite the entrance as their sleeping place; they now settled down there as though in their own hut. 
Early next morning the sea lion got up from his bed and hurried out to fish at sea. And sure enough, he soon brought big fish, mussels, and crabs in large-quantities. That was a considerable amount of food for his wife and his two brothers-in-law. Now the latter no longer wanted for anything. On his own initiative and always willingly the sea lion went out to sea again and again and carried back large amounts of meat. 
One day the Yoálox brothers sent the two women who were living in their hut, Mákuxipa and the sea lion's wife, far away.<note>This event would have to be inserted before the preceding story if chronology were to be observed.</note> Only the two Yoálox and the sea lion stayed behind. Before the two women left the hut the sea lion's wife said goodbye particularly warmly. During this the sea lion whispered to her secretly: "If you hear me roar loudly and painfully, come back quickly. It may be that your brothers intend to kill me. Then I will need your help. So come back quickly if I roar loudly!" She assured her husband: "I'll pay close attention! But I'm sure my brothers won't do you any harm." 
The two Yoálox, for their part, had secretly told Mákuxipa: "Once you have gone far away from here with our sister and you then hear the sea lion roar loudly and painfully, calm her down and tell her: 'It seems the three men are amusing themselves in our hut with games and jokes; they must be very cheerful and contented, that's why the sea lion is roaring so loudly, from sheer exuberance!' In any case, you must hold our sister back by all means. Do not allow her to come running back here to the hut. We are planning to kill the sea lion as soon as possible. That's why we're sending you two far away." Mákuxipa understood all that very well. The two women left the hut and started on the long way to where they were to carry out their task. 
Soon afterward the two Yoálox resumed their daily work. They sat down in front of the hut and prepared the big harpoons. The sea lion also left the hut to go fishing again. He hurried down to the beach. It was a beautiful day and the sun was shining hotly. Soon the sea lion became weak and sleepy; he stretched out on a large rock on the beach and fell asleep. Now he began to snore, and gradually his snoring <pb n="54"/>became so loud that the two Yoálox could hear it; they were sitting in front of their hut. One brother now encouraged the other: "This is the time to kill the sea lion. Surely he's fast asleep for he's snoring terribly. Let's start in on him right now! Besides, we need oil to grease our big harpoons. So far we've been using fat from snails for that, but sea lion oil is much better. That sea lion is unusually big and fat; he'll give a lot of oil and meat. Killing that one will certainly pay!" The other brother agreed completely with this plan. Quickly they went back into the hut; both wanted to consult their mother as to whether or not they should kill the sea lion. They said to her: "Mother, we are tired of greasing our harpoons only with snail fat. We think it is much better to kill that fat sea lion there and take all his oil; we could grease our harpoons with that from now on!" The mother did not like the idea at all and complained loudly: "Oh, but I don't like your plan. The sea lion has always brought me many big fish, precisely the kinds I like best. If you kill him there'll be nobody here to provide me with so many tasty fish. Besides, this sea lion is really kind and anxious to be of help." The two Yoálox became annoyed at their mother's words and replied: "Certainly, it's true what you're saying, this sea lion is really kind and eager to help, but after all he's only an animal and not a human being like us. If we kill him we get all his fat and meat. What an enormous amount that would be! You, too, shall eat much, for his meat is tastier and juicier than that of fish and mussels. You are certain to like it. We'll let you have a lot so that you'll have provisions for a long time." Finally the mother gave in, saying: "All right! Do what you want; kill the sea lion; I won't hold you back any longer." 
Quickly the two Yoálox arranged their harpoon shafts and attached to these the sharp bone points with the long line. Cautiously and silently they sneaked up to the sea lion who was still fast asleep and snoring mightily. Bringing their arms far back they raised their harpoons and thrust them with all their strength. So well did they hit their target that the weapons entered deeply into the large body of the sea lion, wounding him close to the heart. The sea lion woke up in pain; he felt seriously wounded and near death. Then, with all his remaining strength, he roared loudly and painfully, as he roars today when he collapses from a mortal wound. So long and so loudly did he roar that those two women far away in the distance could hear it distinctly. "Alas," the sea lion's wife lamented to Mákuxipa, "do you hear how loudly and miserably my husband is roaring? I'm sure he's calling me to help him, for the two Yoálox are now killing him. I'll run as quickly as I can to the hut and see if he needs me!" Mákuxipa tried hard to hold her back and said persuasively: "How can you even think such a thing? <pb n="55"/>I'm sure the Yoálox are playing with the sea lion; undoubtedly all three are cheerful and merry, that's why the sea lion is laughing so hard. Don't worry and stay quietly here with me; later we'll go back to the hut together." But the sea lion's wife refused to take another step forward; instead, she hurried home as fast as she could, and the other woman realized that she was unable to detain her. They both changed direction and headed for their hut. On the way Mákuxipa continued her efforts to hold the other woman back. 
While the two women were walking along their way the sea lion died on the rock where the two Yoálox had mortally wounded him with their big harpoons. They forthwith began to dismember the large animal and placed several pieces of meat on the fire to roast. Later they sat down to eat these pieces, enjoying them thoroughly. Then they carried other big pieces to the hut and put them on the fire to roast. Soon they wanted to eat again for they thoroughly enjoyed the roasted meat. 
The two Yoálox had left the sea lion's small son alone in the hut when they had gone to kill the powerful animal. As soon as the boy realized that he was alone in the hut he sneaked out, sat down in the sand by the hut, and played. Now the two Yoálox caught sight of him. One of them went quickly over to give him some meat. The child ate with pleasure, for this roast was made from perfectly fresh meat. No sooner had he eaten the big piece than he demanded a second one. The Yoálox gave him a piece of roasted blubber, and he relished this too. 
At this point the two women arrived. They met the boy sitting in the sand near the hut, enjoying a piece of totally fresh meat. When his mother saw the fresh meat in his hands she shuddered with frightful suspicion: she suddenly realized that the boy was eating his own father's flesh! Full of grief she sank to the ground. She became terribly infuriated, seized a large sea urchin from her hand-basket, and threw it at the boy's head as hard as she could. He instantly turned into a fish. The barbs from the sea urchin are still sticking in his head. That is the súna.<note>A thornfish, common in those waters. The Yamana do not eat it "because it used to be a boy."</note> 
Filled with grief and sorrow the sea lion's wife entered the hut. She became terribly frightened when she saw all the pieces of meat roasting on short sticks near the fire. Around the fire there were still other parts of the dismembered sea lion lying on the ground, already cut up to be roasted: head, flippers, stomach parts, flanks, back. She looked with horror at her husband's dismembered body. Boundless grief overwhelmed her and in her despair she sat down and cried bitterly. <pb n="56"/>Nobody exchanged a word with her. Her two brothers, the Yoálox, remained outwardly very calm and unobtrusive; they gave no sign to show that anything unusual had happened. They continued to cut up the meat and watched the pieces near the fire. Mákuxipa, too, behaved very quietly. 
Finally, after a long time, the two Yoálox asked their sister: "Where is your little son? He was sitting outside in front of the door. Why doesn't he come in?" Upset and sad at the same time the woman answered: "When I came back I found the little boy sitting outside in front of the hut. To my horror I saw him eat of his own father's flesh. I became furious and lost control of myself. I grabbed a sea urchin from my little basket and threw it at the boy's head; he went into the water." 
When the two Yoálox learned what had happened to the boy they became very angry at their sister. Furiously, they seized the pieces of sea lion meat which were lying around the fire by the hearth. First they took the front part of the head with the mouth and threw it at their sister's feet, all the while shouting at her sneeringly: "Here you have the mouth which has spoken to you of love and covered you with kisses!" Then they seized the flippers, hurled them over to their sister, and said insolently: "Take these flippers which have embraced you and touched you with lust." Soon afterward they threw the back part before her feet and shouted angrily: "There you have the back, too, on which you have sat and on which the sea lion has carried you to his cave." 
Finally the two Yoálox seized the large stomach part of the sea lion, tossed it to the ground in front of their sister, and cried scornfully: "Now you shall also have the part with which the sea lion excited and satisfied your desire!" The woman remained speechless and so horrified that she knew not what to do. She dared not even look at the pieces of meat, much less touch them. 
A long time has passed since then. Every day this woman witnessed her brothers and Mákuxipa enjoy the fresh meat from the sea lion. Then finally she, too, once timidly took a small piece and tasted it. She liked the meat very much, and soon took bigger pieces. Gradually she calmed down over her loss and eventually forgot her husband, the big sea lion. From then on she ate the blubber and meat of the sea lion with as much pleasure as did her brothers. 
