NSA010285
In the beginning the two Yoálox lived just with their own sister; neither of them had a wife. But the time came when they no longer enjoyed being always alone during the day and sleeping alone at night. Finally they revealed their feelings to Yoálox-tárnuxipa: "As you can see, we are all alone here. We don't want to go on living like this any longer. Help us to get a woman soon!" Yoálox-tárnuxipa agreed and promised to help her brothers. 
<pb n="43"/>The two brothers and their sister discussed what to do. The men had excellent weapons and were very skillful. Consequently they always brought home a great catch from the hunt and reveled in abundance; there were large supplies of meat in their hut. Hulušénuwa,<note>The smaller of the two Fuegian wrens, Troglodytes homensis.</note> on the other hand, was in a different situation; he perpetually lacked meat because he had many wives. All the wives asked insistently to visit the two Yoálox and to gaze at them for a long time. When Hulušénuwa was once again out of meat he personally dressed up each wife extremely beautifully and ordered each to decorate and paint herself even more with colors. Then he sent one woman after the other to the two Yoálox to fetch some meat. Each woman had decorated and painted herself with colors and designs of her personal taste; each was different from the others; all were very pretty. 
With this was introduced the custom of painting one's face and entire body. This way the people make themselves attractive and get enjoyment from it. Since the time when little Hulušénuwa ordered his many wives to decorate themselves with colorful designs all Yamana realize that they have to paint themselves on certain occasions.<note>In the ensuing discussion these were mentioned as special occasions by way of explanation: visits, menstruation, mourning and funeral ceremonies, puberty rites, and the kína-ceremony.</note> This is now the rule. To this day Hulušénuwa's women have kept the beautiful paint they applied at that time. Whenever the men perform the kína they imitate the colors and patterns on the coats and feathers of animals by painting their bodies in various ways.<note>One must realize, and it was expressly brought to my attention at this point, that all those women are not considered real people any more than the two Yoálox. The former turned into birds, the latter went with Yoálox-tárnuxipa up to the sky where one still recognizes them as stars.</note> 
Without delay little Hulušénuwa sent first Tákašakipa<note>The noisy seagull, Larus belcheri.</note> to the Yoálox. She entered the hut of the two Yoálox and introduced herself. The brothers considered the woman long and thoroughly. Then they said to their sister: "Give her a lot of meat." Yoálox-tárnuxipa gave Tákašakipa plenty of meat and with that she was dismissed. The Yoálox brothers and the sister had agreed ahead of time: the two brothers would look over each woman carefully and consider whether she was beautiful and to their liking. Every woman they did not like would be given a lot of meat by their sister and dismissed. 
After a while Lášixkipa made an appearance. The Yoálox looked her over, but did not like her. Then Yoálox-tárnuxipa gave her plenty of meat and she was dismissed. One after the other little Hulušénuwa <pb n="44"/>sent the rest of his wives: the šékuš, the kímoa, the lúrux, the wasénim, the lékakuta, the wípatux, the malépa, the šáneš, the wémarkipa, the kiwágu, the detehúrux, the čokóa, and several others, for he had many wives. But as pretty as all of them were, the two Yoálox did not like them.<note>Here, to avoid superfluous repetitions only a few names have been quoted in the abbreviated form without the gender designation "kipa" and without a closer zoological classification.</note> Their sister gave much meat to each of the women, who then hurried back to their hut. Thus, one after the other, the long line of little Hulušénuwa's wives presented themselves to the two Yoálox. The latter looked at each woman carefully, but none suited them. More women kept coming. They entered the hut of the Yoálox alone, but were all given much meat soon and dismissed. 
The last to appear was Mákuxipa, little Hulušénuwa's most beautiful wife. When she entered the hut the two Yoálox liked her immensely and could not take their eyes off her. They whispered to their sister: "Don't give any meat to this woman! We want to keep her in our hut and prevent her from returning to her husband. We like this beautiful woman very much!" Therefore Yoálox-tárnuxipa said to Mákuxipa: "Just sit down quietly here beside my brothers; they both like you very much!" Without embarrassment, Mákuxipa sat down as Yoálox-tárnuxipa had told her to, namely on the bed of the two Yoálox. They soon began caressing the beautiful woman. Later they persuaded Mákuxipa to remain with them in the hut; the Yoálox frankly admitted to her how deeply they were in love with her. This pleased her very much and she said: "All right, I'll stay with you!" The two Yoálox were overjoyed that this beautiful woman agreed to stay with them. They soon began to satisfy their desire. But they especially thanked their sister who had helped to retain the beautiful woman. Little Hulušénuwa waited in his hut for Mákuxipa, but she failed to return. Finally, after a long time he found out that the two Yoálox were keeping his wife for their own pleasure. It made him unspeakably sad and he cried out plaintively: "Oh, poor me! Precisely the most beautiful of my wives they have persuaded to stay and taken away from me. All the other less beautiful ones they let come home after giving them meat. How grievously I miss my lovely Mákuxipa!" Little Hulušénuwa kept lamenting incessantly this way. The two Yoálox again amused themselves with Mákuxipa. She, too, liked it very much in the hut of the two brothers. They took turns sleeping with her and were very happy not to have to do without this any longer.<note>What is meant is frequent and free intercourse for sexual satisfaction, for which previously they had had no opportunity. So their relationship with the woman is not to be interpreted as polyandry.</note> 
<pb n="45"/>One day, very early in the morning, the elder Yoálox went into the forest to hunt and collect wood. But his brother remained stretched out on his bed; by his side lay beautiful Mákuxipa. Since the elder Yoálox was away they abandoned themselves to their boundless desire. They spent the entire day on the bed without thinking of getting up. They day had passed much too quickly for them, and the elder Yoálox returned just as it was getting dark. Cautiously and unnoticed he approached the hut. Then he became aware of the fact that those two were still fondling each other and rolling around on the bed. That made him curious. Now he listened intently; he wanted to hear what they were talking about. He heard Mákuxipa whisper to the younger Yoálox: "I like your penis a lot. It is large and fills my vagina. It is red like the máku.<note>The scarlet flower of Embothrium coccineum.</note> Your brother has a small one which doesn't excite me in this way. Look, I like your large penis much more than I do your brother's. I would rather lie with you for a long time." At these words the younger Yoálox was delighted. His elder brother, who was standing outside leaning against the hut, listened attentively and understood clearly what the two were whispering to each other. 
After a while he entered the hut. He threw down the heavy pieces of wood that he had brought back and sat down by the fire, heavy rain had drenched him through. Unobtrusively the younger Yoálox moved away a bit from Mákuxipa, but both still remained lying on the bed. For a long time the elder Yoálox warmed himself by the fire, then he addressed the woman in a very ill-humored tone: "How can you lie with my brother from morning to night!" Said she indifferently: "I simply enjoy it very much with him!" This made him even angrier, and he blew up at her: "I know very well why you like it so much with him that you lie together the whole day. What did you just whisper to him?" Mákuxipa replied, embarrassed: "What could I have whispered to him? We only talked about unimportant things." To this the elder Yoálox answered: "In any case you have had a lot of fun with my brother. I also heard distinctly how you told him: "I like your penis a lot. It's large and fills my vagina. It's red like the máku. Your brother has a small one which doesn't excite me in this way. Look, I like your large penis much more than I do your brother's. I would rather lie with you for a long time." He approached the bed where she was lying stretched out, and his brother moved away. He began fondling and hugging Mákuxipa. Then he lay down on top of the woman and inserted his penis into her vagina. His penis swelled so that it tore the woman's vagina. Instantly a rather large amount of blood flowed out. Yoálox asked her: "Do you want my member to grow larger still? Are you satisfied?" Mákuxipa did not answer a word. 
<pb n="46"/>Then the elder Yoálox rose from the bed and told her: "You are now túri! So now you may take my younger brother for your husband! But first I shall give you a few instructions so that the blood will not flow excessively and you don't weaken!" He gave her all kinds of advice which still holds true for her and for all women. Emphatically he insisted: "You must remain still and silent and avoid all chattering. If possible, spend the entire period in your hut. Stay away from men, and should you meet one, make a wide detour. Abstain from all food and eat only what I allow you to. Be content with little water. During this time [of your first menstruation] work particularly hard, help the other women eagerly, fetch a lot of drinking water and firewood for everybody. Observe all this advice faithfully!" Much more still did the elder Yoálox instruct Mákuxipa to do. She followed the instructions closely and her condition improved. She soon felt better, and the bleeding finally stopped. After a few days, she also did not have to renew the design that Yoálox had painted on her face.<note>This refers to the particular face paint that is obligatory during menstruation (Gusinde 1937:757, fig. 79).</note> All this time Yoálox-tárnuxipa sat beside Mákuxipa, guarding and instructing her attentively, and constantly helping her. She also gave her other advice, with which Mákuxipa faithfully complied. Finally Yoálox-tárnuxipa suggested to her two brothers: "Let's have a big celebration, now that this woman is túri!" Her brothers agreed; they brought large amounts of meat and ate their fill. That was the first túrikipa tâtu.<note>The details of this festive event are mentioned in Gusinde 1937:757.</note> 
