NSA010333
<pb n="183"/>Once there were two brothers. They were clever yékamuš. For a long time they had been living together peacefully but one day they became real enemies. The people who at that time lived together with these two brothers in Agáia-wáia [a strip of coast in Ponsonby Sound] split into two groups, each group joining the yékamuš of its liking. Both groups left that place. They went to a long channel in the west; one settled on the southern shore, the other on the northern. The enmity between the two brothers and the antagonism of the two groups persisted; each yékamuš felt that he was more capable than the other and each group praised most the one they had joined. Finally by that long channel there<note>All this happened in a vision or in a state of dreaming, and each of the two adversaries was as aware of what was happening as though it were taking place in everyday life. That is precisely the special way of shamans.</note> one said to the other: "Now I'll prove to you that I can do more and that I'm stronger than you!" One of them left his hut [in his dream], got into his canoe, and went to the center of the channel. Here he met his brother who had come from the opposite shore. Instantly he began to fight against the latter, hurling a pointed yékuš into his heart. Then he returned to shore and went into his hut. The other brother had likewise dreamed: he left his hut, got into his canoe, and went to the middle of the channel. Here he met his brother who had come from the opposite shore. Instantly he began to fight against the latter, hurling a pointed yékuš into his heart. Then he returned to shore and went into his hut. The following morning both of the yékamuš woke up. Each <pb n="184"/>was feeling very weak and faint, and each said to the people around him: "I'm going to die soon; there is a lot of blood flowing from my mouth and nose. Last night I was fatally wounded by my brother!" Indeed, this yékamuš died even before the sun reached its peak. The people at once lit a signal fire informing the group on the other side that a lóima would soon be sung. At exactly the same time the people on the other shore also lit a signal informing the group on the opposite shore that a lóima would soon be sung there, too. From each shore a canoe promptly departed with messengers who were to carry the news to the other side. The two canoes met in the middle of the channel and one told the other: "Our yékamuš has just died; his brother killed him!" Now all the people soon knew what had occurred and that those two yékamuš had been equally strong. 
