NSA010327
Some people from the central group had once their camp in Hamanáulum.<note>A short beach about three kilometers west of what is today Ušuáia.</note> They had observed that many other families had already gone west. A rumor was going around: "In Wáiman<note>This denotes the entire west of the Yamana territory, particularly the northern shore of Beagle Channel (Gusinde 1937:205).</note> there is a whale lying on the beach." So the people said to themselves: "We will also go there to get a lot of meat and blubber for ourselves. We'll just get another good night's rest!" And so, the next morning they got into their canoes. They traveled day and night, so as to reach the whale as soon as possible. There were ten families and a yékamuš. Because they also traveled at night - and these nights were very dark - they could not see the coast line very well and actually went past the whale! They continued paddling on and on. They had long since reached Hapananúši<note>Name for the neighboring territory of the Halakwulup.</note> and finally entered a harbor there; they were all very tired. They got out to scout and inquire about the whale they had been looking for all this time. 
Many people had built a large camp here, but they were cannibals. It was their custom to eat everybody who came from the east. In order to kill them with ease they would permit only one stranger to enter a hut and stay there overnight, for each family could easily overpower one stranger in their hut and quickly kill him. 
When these ten families arrived they were distributed over ten different huts. The yékamuš was sent to yet another hut. He went inside; an old woman was sitting on her bed near the fire making a small basket. When the yékamuš had entered, her husband said to him: <pb n="173"/>"Sit down here by the fire! You must be very hungry?" To this the yékamuš replied: "Yes, I'm very hungry, for we traveled far in search of the beached whale without finding it. Where can the whale be?" Then the man took his knife and grabbed his wife by her left breast; it was long and fleshy and he cut it off. He promptly hung it by the fire to roast it. The yékamuš saw this. Horrified he said: "Are you by any chance going to roast this piece for me?" The other man answered: "Yes, it's for you. You are very hungry, aren't you?" To this the yékamuš said very indignantly: "I'll never eat human flesh! What do you think we are? We came to look for that whale which we were told was stranded here in the west. We don't eat human flesh!" So saying he left the hut and looked around outside until he found a piece of meat. With this he returned to the hut, put it on the fire and roasted it; then he ate. 
There was also a basket hanging in this hut containing ten small children. When they saw the yékamuš they happily jumped around in their basket, singing: "Yárum hapánana, yárum hapánana," meaning: 'Today we'd like to eat this man.' But the two old people replied, likewise very happily: "Hamašúnna hapánana, hamašúnna hapánana.<note>The word hapánana, as used here by the Halakwulup, was described to me as having no meaning whatsoever. The children wanted to make clear to the old people that they would prefer to eat the man that day, while the old people wanted to put off the feast until the next day. But so that the stranger would not realize what they intended to do with him they only emphasized the adverbs "today" and "tomorrow," together with a completely meaningless word. This was sufficient for both the old people and the children, who understood one another. Whether it is related to hapona I can't determine. | The same meaningless word was also the reason for characterizing themselves as the Hapánana Yamana and their territory as Hapananúši (Gusinde 1937:957).</note> 
The yékamuš then inferred what that was supposed to mean and realized the serious danger he and his people were in! Since he was a great yékamuš he caused a profound sleep to come over all the people in this camp by secretly throwing a piece of fat into the fire. While it was burning, they fell asleep at once and slept so soundly that no one moved any more. Quickly the yékamuš ran to his own people and told them that they were in grave danger. Everybody quickly grabbed their things. They stole from the cannibals whatever they could get their hands on, loaded everything into their canoes, and were gone. They hastened to get back again to the east, their homeland. 
When they were already far away a dog began to bark so loudly that those people woke up and noticed that all their belongings had been stolen. Far in the distance they caught sight of the thieves hurrying away. Quickly they prepared to pursue them. When the people saw <pb n="174"/>that the cannibals were coming after them they were overwhelmed by fear. They hid in Asúsiwaia.<note>This small bay is situated west of Bahía La Romanche, in the northwestern arm of the Beagle Channel.</note> But the Hapananúši people spotted them, and with the sling threw a big šewáli [firestone]. It fell very close to the hiding place of the fugitives and burst with an explosion like thunder. One can still hear it thundering in that region.<note>This refers to the thunderlike noises caused by icebergs colliding or large chunks of ice breaking off from the glaciers.</note> In order to flee more quickly and easily, the fugitives tossed a large part of the stolen goods overboard. They continued paddling again, eastward all the time, past Lapatáia and Hamanáulum, until they finally got to Ušuáia where they had had their previous camp. But the Hapananúši people were still throwing big rocks after them. 
Thus even today in that whole region, but especially in Asúsiwaia, Lapatáia, and Hamanáulum, one can still see large boulders scattered around; all these the Hapnanúši people threw after the thieves with their slings. The things the thieves had stolen also turned into rocks and are still lying around where the fugitives had tossed them overboard. 
