NSA010305
<note>See also Koppers 1924:197-200.</note> 
Túwuxkipa<note>The familiar dark-gray night heron, Nycticorax obscurus.</note> went out to sea every morning to fish. She always did this with deep pleasure and joy, never taking her husband or any of her relatives along. She was secretly having an affair with a lover, Šégetex.<note>The beautiful kingfisher, Ceryle torquata var. stellata.</note> Her husband knew nothing about this, nor did the others suspect anything. Precisely because of this she went out very happily every morning and did not return to the huts on the shore until late afternoon. Each time she brought a good number of big fish. As she approached the shore she would call to her husband from the canoe. He would come immediately, help her pull the canoe up on the beach, and unload the fish. Eventually she would say: "Now carry all the fish to the hut and prepare them. You must draw, wash, and preserve them well. For I have a bad case of diarrhea and must quickly go aside; I'll soon be back. Take good care of everything I just told you!" She would quickly disappear and run to her lover, Šégetex. She wanted her husband to be occupied and unable to follow her, so she ordered him to do the jobs which she actually should have done herself. But this man was very good-natured and obediently did everything his wife demanded of him. She spent a long time with her lover, during which both yielded to their desire. 
These two had been meeting secretly for many months. Watching very carefully, the other people saw Túwuxkipa go out alone every morning to fish, return in the afternoon with a large catch, and keep her husband occupied with the fish for a long period of time. But gradually the people also noticed that she was secretly having intercourse with Šégetex. Finally one day the husband's relatives came to him and said: "Why do you so eagerly help your wife pull the canoe up on the beach, remove the entrails of the fish, and preserve the meat? That is her work; after all! She promptly runs away, upon returning from the journey. Your wife is surely having an affair with the kingfisher. For she runs to him as soon as she comes back from fishing. She tricks you; 'I have a bad case of diarrhea and must go aside at once, indeed!' But that is a lie; she doesn't suffer from perpetual diarrhea at all. She has no other desire but to run to Šégetex and continue their love play. Do not believe those daily lies of hers any more." 
When the man heard that his wife had been deceiving him for so long he became furious. From that day on he no longer helped her with what really was her job; he no longer undertook to unload, cut up, and <pb n="104"/>preserve the fish. Túwuxkipa wondered about her husband's changed behavior but could not make him do that work. She continued running to her Šégetex anyway. 
Finally, one day the man decided to follow his wife in secret. He watched her with Šégetex and it made him extremely angry. Silently he sneaked back to his hut. The following day he made a strong sírsa [a crab-fork with four prongs]. After his wife had returned in the afternoon and unloaded all the fish she told her husband as usual: "I'm suffering from a bad case of diarrhea and must quickly go aside. I'll be back soon." And she left. Her husband followed her unnoticed. His wife gave herself again to Šégetex and they carried on their love play. When the man saw the two embracing he threw his sírsa with such force that both were pierced simultaneously. They lay impaled on the ground. He left them in this condition and quickly went away. Later those two turned into birds. 
